07/06/24, 5:05 am - Messages and calls are end-to-end encrypted. Only people in this chat can read, listen to, or share them. *Learn more*.
07/06/24, 4:29 am - Disappearing messages were turned off. Tap to change.
07/06/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 378

“The way humans used fire made them unique. Almost all animals depend on their own bodies for power: the strength of their muscles, the size of their teeth, or the sharpness of their claws. But thanks to fire, humans gained control of a limitless source of power that had nothing to do with their bodies. A single weak human with a fire stick could burn down an entire forest in a matter of hours, destroying thousands of trees and killing thousands of animals.”
Yuval Harari      unstoppable us.

The important material required for a house construction is cement. It was under government control. So there was a scarcity in the open market leading to a higher price. The market price was very high compared to the control price - almost double.  I was looking for ways of getting cement at the control price.
There are two approaches. One was to use  the chief minister's sanction. I didn't want to use it. Another was to get it from the factory . But there was a pollution case going on against the cement factory. So I can't ask the owner . It becomes a favour. 
The second approach was to show foreign exchange remittances. I had about 1000 dollars from my visit in 1978 to the US - reimbursement for my travel expenses. So I  decided to encash the dollars. 
My cousin Jayanthi and her husband , Subramanian,  were in bangalore at that time. He was working in UCB and got a transfer to Bangalore.  He helped me, and I opened an account in UCB  . So I converted the dollars to rupees and got cement at control rates. It would meet only less than half my construction needs. I had to buy a lot from the open market at a high cost. There was a pilferage by the truck driver . Also the watchman,  appointed by the mason,  sold a few bags without our knowledge but he did it by conniving with the mason. They shared the loot. I lost the money. 
We ordered for the kitchen granite slab - a single unit integrated with a washbasin at one end and a grinding unit next to it along with a long platform for cooking purposes. 
At that time, the red oxide floor was out of fashion. Marble was yet to come in. Mosaic tiles were available. Mostly gray tiles were used by most people . I used white mosaic tiles. It was expensive , but gave a great appearance.  We bought tiles from the Parijatha tiles factory in yeshwantpur.  Laying these tiles, grinding , polishing were skilled jobs and took a month almost.  
We knew Mr Mahanthesh , who was working at Central Power Research Institute. Mr KVK Premkumar, my ground floor neighbour and a great friend ,  introduced him to me. I entrusted the electrical and painting work to him. Mahantesh was with me for more than 25 years doing all my electrical and painting work. He was a great help for us. 
After we got loan approval, we started with a Bhoomi Puja in July 1982. It took more than a year to complete. 
More later.
Greetings 
Dks
08/06/24, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 379
“If a man walk in the woods for love of them half of each day, he is in danger of being regarded as a loafer; but if he spends his whole day as a speculator, shearing off those woods and making earth bald before her time, he is esteemed an industrious and enterprising citizen. As if a town had no interest in its forests but to cut them down!”
Thoreau

Let me look at a comment by Prof Vasudev Parvati. It gives me happiness when I see people reading the quotes in my post. I received a few comments from some readers. This comment is on reading - quote by Thoreau in post 377.

“It's a really beautiful quote on reading, sir! I don't think many of us employ that much of intensity in reading a book!”

My response
Thanks.
The habit of normal reading and casual reading is reducing. I have found that voracious readers are leaders in society. Also , Readers become thinkers. 
Life is not worth living if one doesn't read at least a good non fiction every year. 
I had a very unhappy incident / shock that happened to me. I was asked to talk to the faculty individually in an engineering college . I spent a week talking to them individually. 
One question I asked to every one was “ what general books did you read in the last year? “ The reply was shocking. None have read a book in a year or a few years. That was shocking. I feel that  reading habits have disappeared from many faculty.  But, fortunately  it exists in many people still. Many do intense reading. So both opposites exist. 
Reading a book is only the first step. The important question is the remembering power. That is where Thoreau makes important observations. Some have a capacity to remember pertinent points from a book they read decades ago. It is due to the concentration in reading and the impact of certain statements. 
Let me give my experience here. 
I had interviewed hundreds for faculty positions in many engineering colleges. When I asked them about ,  say,  concurrency or the third normal form , many used to reply that they had forgotten  . Some couldn't talk about logical independence in database systems.  That is the sad state of learning and remembering. How will they teach, if selected?
So we should heed to Thoreau and read with more attention.  
In Indian households of the yester years , reading was a sacred activity. Ladies read Ramayana or Mahabharata everyday for about an hour. That was our tradition.
We had a lot of manuscripts in palm leafs in my house in the 1940s and 50s .
I started reading during my school days itself. I was reading one fiction book per week. When I went to college, I diversified my reading to include English classics , English humour , biography and history books and Shakespeare. This is in addition to text books and engineering books borrowed from the college library.This continued till I joined IISc. At IISc, my interests increased to technology books, journals , research articles and seminal and classic books. I started reading philosophical books . I read Newton, Bertrand Russell, Whitehead , Plato and Upanishads and many more authors.  Past two decades, I have been focusing on mostly non fiction books and concentrated on technology, AI, cognition, psychology, Indian philosophy , Upanishads and biography. The habit of reading for me started at a young age and so it was easy to continue that practice. 
Greetings
Dks
08/06/24, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 520

Mr Bala Ajjampur commented on conscious living. 
“I think aware life is a guiding light for those who suffer midlife crises. May be this is a prescription that is more necessary than before because of the lifestyle that is being led by technology. It tends to average or smoothen out our ups and downs of life that otherwise could have created the aware life automatically. With the advent of AI, it may totally disappear, and then what? Or is it going to help create aware life? Should we lean away from AI or towards it? Is there a way to rethink AI in such a way that it gets tuned out of managing man made systems and tuned in to managing aware life?”
My response
Let me address your questions in sequence. 
Question 1. Will AI make us morons?
Answer 
Yes many will become morons. They will lose independence, need government support to live and survive. Some will be denied everything because of their digital illiteracy. Some will become AI and data slaves. 
So we need to make them smarter.
But many will have to be super smart to avoid disasters and slavery. 

Question 2
Impact of AI on human intelligence - will it help people to become smarter ?
Answer

AI is not intelligent. It is nowhere near humans. So AI,  in the beginning , will lead to a lot of teething troubles and will not help us. There is a big learning curve. Who will learn rightly, who will not learn rightly , who will misuse - we don't know. It heralds uncertainty and crises. With AI systems, initially the Midlife crisis will increase due to job losses, erroneous operations, misunderstanding of the results, wrong results, wrong use of AI  , accidents due to robots, slavery to digital,  data and AI. 
It won't help in improving our life, building a harmonious society and increasing jobs. 
We need to evolve strong, controlled , human driven methodologies to curb independence of AI. We need a good , focussed learning strategy and systems very different from current education system.current education system is not capable of handling AI. It is a copy paste system. 
AI warrants humans to go for higher conscious levels. Humans need to query, think, analyse, contemplate , be alert  put in controls, curb AI independence. So they need a higher cognition and conscious level. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
09/06/24, 4:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  380.

“Thinking is no more than a tiny aspect of the totality of consciousness, the totality of who you are.”
“You then no longer derive your identity, your sense of who you are, from the incessant stream of thinking that in the old consciousness you take to be yourself. What a liberation to realize that the “voice in my head” is not who I am.”
“The primary cause of unhappiness is never the situation but your thoughts about it.”
Eckhart Tolle
Oneness with all life. 

There is another comment by Dr Sanjay Chitnis on my earlier quotes. It is a deep one. 

“Dear Sir, in yesterday's post 352, you gave a quote that mentioned stoic philosophy and today you started quoting the Stithaprajna and the most important part of our Sanatana Dharma. How do you compare the two - stoic living and living as sthithaprajna?”

My response. 
This needs a detailed reply. 
First of all, we need to know the differences between western philosophy and Indian philosophy. 
The western philosophy initially focused on human behaviours . Socrates and Plato insisted on goodness , integrity, ethics, 
and compassion for people. The focus afterwards was more on humans. By middle ages , this aspect shifted to psychology. Still Kant , Santayana, Russell,  Whitehead , Wittgenstein  concentrated on humans . Some looked at nature. 
The western philosophy was and is looking at knowns. So they ignored the unknowns. Astronomy entered the domain of scientists like Galileo only in the middle ages. 
The quest of all philosophies is to find out the truth. The western philosophy started to depend on rational approaches like logic and mathematics. Some used linguistic approaches. But it was restricted to “ understanding known observed facts and phenomena and trying to explain their behaviours”. It ignored unknown and unobservable phenomena. It felt religion is a mystery and steered clear of it. 

Indian philosophy is the opposite. It looked for unknowns at the higher level of vedanta. That purifies and elevates the mind and provides the clarity between real and temporary. It discusses Illusions leading to mistakes. So it goes beyond normal sensory perceptions and uses consciousness at many levels to understand and explain facts. It wants correctness and clarity. It uses language, logic , analysis, and mathematics  but it goes beyond them to look for unknowns. It also gives a primacy for mind over matter. 
Indian system is multidimensional. 
It  didn't ignore the human system  . Yoga provides eight way approaches - ashtanga yoga. It considers character as important for living. So it defines fos and don'ts for people and yoga practitioners. These are the yamas and niyamas. These are quite detailed. Then it considers a unifying energy called  prana and suggests ways to improve this which improves blood circulation, increases oxygen intake and regulates breathing. It also calms the mind and reduces the pulse rate . 
Next, yoga gives exercises for keeping the body in shape. Meditation , concentration and contemplation improves the mind  .
Also we have vaiseshika and sankhya  dealing with the material world including nature. It is an  integrating system. 

It is a brief explanation of the six darshanas. 
Let us discuss  stoic philosophy in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
09/06/24, 10:37 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir for the detailed reply.
10/06/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 381
What is Stoicism?
 Let me quote the three philosophers involved in developing this philosophy. 

“ In life our first job is this, to divide and distinguish things into two categories: externals I cannot control, but the choices I make with regard to them I do control. Where will I find good and bad? In me, in my choices.” 
~ Epictetus
The Stoic principle, however, exhorted the achieving of happiness despite the ruinous situations in which one might find oneself. Nowhere did the teaching guarantee that you would not fall upon misfortune. 
 Instead, it encouraged its subjects to face hard times from a reasonable and practical perspective. Instead of cursing fate or the things that affect and cause distress in our lives, Stoicism teaches control of the emotions by looking at the cause of distress objectively. 
Stoicism is the practice of directing your mind and actions. You were born into a world where you learn to respond or react to what happens in the environment around you.
First time the concept of mind was accepted. But this was discarded till 19th century. 

   Stoicism appeared in 3BCE—an ancient school of philosophy that advocated a kind of mental discipline and detachment from external forces. Those who abided by these principles were known as Stoics. They included Zeno of Citium (Stoicism’s founder), Epictetus, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius, and many more.
According to Zeno’s philosophy,  happiness is a virtue. It was held in the same high regard as wisdom, justice, faith, temperance and charity. 
 The philosophy asserts that you cannot control the occurrences, events or situations coming at you from external sources. 
 You cannot rely on or put your faith in them. You can only rely on yourself and your response to them. The philosophy effectively determines that you have control over what you think and can do, and therefore, you can choose how you respond to these events.
Having developed the philosophy of control of behavior and of steadfastness in the face of misfortune, Zeno began teaching at the famous Stoa Poikile in the ancient Angora located in Athens. Hence  the name stoicism.

Seneca stated so well in the first century of the common era, in his essay “On the Shortness of Life”:
“Were all the geniuses of history to focus on this single theme, they could never fully express their bafflement at the darkness of the human mind. No person would give up even an inch of their estate, and the slightest dispute with a neighbor can mean hell to pay; yet we easily let others encroach on our lives—worse, we often pave the way for those who will take it over. No person hands out their money to passersby, but to how many do each of us hand out our lives! We’re tight-fisted with property and money, yet think too little of wasting time, the one thing about which we should all be the toughest misers. “
A very illuminating statement to understand and follow. Why do you rent your mind to others when you guard your physical possessions?
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
10/06/24, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 521

Regarding  your next question on leaning on to or away from AI, 
My response is:
Do you have a choice?
We don't have a choice. We have to accept new technologies or be left behind. 
The question is how do I  adapt to AI. 
It is a lot  tougher than adapting to steam engines. 
But in those days technologies like steam engines or electricity didn't affect common people immediately. It took years for electricity to reach homes and centuries for us to use electric appliances. 
That wasn't the case with computers and definitely AI is in a hurry to attack most of us within a decade. 
So getting adjusted to AI is important. 
As Alistair Maclean wrote the novel “ Fear is the key” in 1960 , we have to understand the fear and respond correctly and positively. There are many supporters of AI and many doomsday people against AI. 
Let us be realistic. AI is there. We will see many new generations of AI coming in the next few years. 
So be prepared.
Accept AI. Adjust to to it. Take advance measures to protect order. Remember the Taittiriya upanishad
Rtm vadishyami.
Rtm is global order. Respect nature. 
AI will shortly make our jobs redundant .
AI is better than people with average intelligence. 


Your last question of making AI to manage humans is dangerous but will not happen now , but  may be much later. It will take a directional change to move in the direction of managing our mind. Neurologists are working on it, not AI people. That is the stage when we should be cautious . Unlike cloning research, control of mind management research is not easy ,as it will be carried out by many people.  but the control and directioning need to be done. 
Let me quite Yuval Harari:
Harari predicts that there will be two types of religion which will emerge due to man’s quest for happiness, divinity, and peace: Techno-humanism and Data Religion. The former speaks of man still hanging on to his authority over his decisions while the latter is about man relying on data in making decisions for him.
The future is seen with humans relying heavily on data and disregarding their inner voice in making decisions. Man is foreseen to be constantly connected to the internet and constantly feeding it data for the use of the society. Although there is no certainty to this prediction, the current events show that this future is very likely to happen unless man changes his actions and steers the future in another direction.
See the dangers. 
Greetings 
Dks
11/06/24, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 382

Whereas stoics considered  the mind to be important in living , stithaprajna goes beyond giving a compelete description and prescription. It talks about buddhi part of mind. It wants one to have stronger control of ego , senses and emotions. It looks for a no desire state.  It is explained in Gita  .
Sthitaprajña (स्थितप्रज्ञ). is defined as a person firm in judgment or wisdom, free from any hallucination, calm  and contented. It starts with minimising wants , controlling emotions, following yamas and niyamas and keeping the mind calm and clear of biases. It leads to single focussed concentration towards self awareness to be obtained in stages.  It moves towards renunciation and self awareness through focused meditation. 
According to the Gita, a sthitaprajna:
1.Is free from worldly attachments and aversions
2.Does not need to seek the truth because he sees truth
3.Is free from motives and ego
4.Has attained full knowledge of the Ultimate Reality
5.Does good deeds with no expectations of reward
6.Is aware of the oneness of Reality

There are many characteristics and many hard steps needed to become a stithaprajna. 
Some are listed below 
1.The person who is not disturbed by the fluctuations of sukha and dukha is eligible to reclaim their own indestructible and immortal nature.
2.That which is asat - false will not endure, while that which is sat - truth can never cease to exist. Both these states of being are known by the seers as that which is tattva ‘always true’.
3.Arjuna, these dehas - body  which must someday end and then be burned are inhabited by an undying, indestructible, immeasurable being.
4.For those attached to enjoying material pleasures, their immortal potential is distorted and stolen away. As a result, they do not have the discernment to see their atma or taste the greater pleasures of the highest states of transcendental samadhi.
5.Because you have free will, you can control your actions, but you are never in control of the fruit or ultimate outcome of what you do.
Therefore, never let attachment to the fruits be the ultimate reason for your actions. Conversely, do not simply retreat into a state of detached inaction.
6.Instead, perform all your actions in a state of yogic awareness, without attachment to the result, undisturbed by pursing siddhis ‘perfections’ or avoiding asiddhi ‘imperfection’ in whatever you do. It is said that such balanced consciousness is called karma yoga.
7.Listen, Arjuna, buddhi yoga is greatly superior to mere material actions. Take refuge in loving surrender One who is permanently linked to the buddhi faculty goes beyond the relativity of sukha and dukha as the determiner of what they do.-to the wise discernment of the buddhi faculty.
8.When your buddhi remains steady and unwavering in meditation upon  your atma ‘true self’, you will no longer be distracted with the details of vedic rituals. Then, absorbed in samadhi, you will directly perceive your true nature and achieve the perfection of buddhi yoga.
A person whose manas is not disturbed in times of dukha ‘pain’; who is not controlled by the need for sukha ‘pleasure’; who has overcome all attachment, fear, and anger; and whose focus upon their atma is always steady is called a muni.
See the cause effect sequences explained in Gita. 
While contemplating the objects of the senses, attachment to them is born. From such attachment, intense desires arise.From unfulfilled desires, the seeds of anger appear.
From unrestrained anger, delusion arises. From this delusion, memory is lost. When memory is lost, discernment is lost. When discernment is lost, this leads to harmful or destructive actions.
When the atma controls the indriyas ‘material senses’ and when one no longer experiences compulsive attachment or aversion to the objects of the senses, then the atma attains a tranquil, divine state known as prasada.
When the buddhi is not connected with the atma, and when the manas is not steady, there is no shanti. Without shanti, how can there be lasting sukha?
When the manas runs after the objects of the wandering indriyas ‘senses’, they carry away one’s prajna, exactly as a ship on the water is driven by a strong wind.
So it is a final state. But it has many prescriptions. It is holistic . 
That is what a highly conscious state implies. 
Greetings 
Dks
12/06/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 383
‘Who, again, is more heartless than he, who, though possessed of affluence, eateth himself and weareth excellent robes himself without distributing his wealth  to his dependents? ‘
Vidura niti

Let me return to my activities during the year 1982. 
TCS , as discussed before,  had  set up the research centre at Pune. Mr Kohli wanted me to visit the centre . They wanted me to join that centre. Prof EC Subba Rao from IIT Kanpur , a materials engineering expert , joined as director of the research centre. The centre was named as Tata RDD centre.  I took my family to Pune for a three day trip. 
Prof Rao put in a lot of effort to attract me to the centre. Knowing my interest in rural technologies, he arranged a visit to some villages where Tata trust was working. It was a one day affair.  
He also arranged a visit to Mr Salunkye who runs pani panchayat in many villages. It was very impressive.  The idea was water distribution is more important than land distribution. So he wanted villages to join in this scheme voluntarily. They should accept the following. 
1.No Sugarcane cultivation. 
2.A water distributor is appointed . Everyone get equal water rights, not proportional to their land holding  He regulates water supply to the lands and houses.
3. Those who didn't have land also  get their water rights. They can sell it to anyone. 
This is the first experiment on using common resources equitably . 
I liked Dr Subba Rao's understanding of what was happening in Pune within a short time of his arrival there. It was really great. 
My wife visited a speech centre. Nothing was going on in the Tata RDD  centre wrt computer science research. Rao was planning to get a few people to work on biotechnology. Funding was open ended. 
We spent three days there . There was nothing to see or no one to discuss with in the centre except my discussions with Dr Rao. 
We discussed the research scenario in computer science in India and why it wasn't picking speed. That conversation was quite interesting. We identified many resource problems like availability of computers , hardware, software systems - even Unix was not available in india then - , databases - we didn't have a relational database in india then -. I didn't get any assurance from Dr Rao that TCS will provide these resources. He just commiserated  with me on the sad state in India. 
I didn't see any glimmer of hope there  . So  I wasn't keen on joining the centre. We went to Bombay from Pune by Deccan queen.  I met Nirmal jain. 
Actually I went to the 11th floor of the Air India building by elevator. My family stayed downstairs. My daughter was not comfortable with the elevator.  I told him that I am not interested in joining the Tata RDD centre. When I and Nirmal  came down by the elevator, Nirmal met my family. Later he visited us at our bangalore residence. 
 Later , it was proved  that  my decision was correct. The centre grew very slowly concentrating only on materials research . Even biotechnology didn't pick up. It took more than a decade for the centre to get into software tools research. I always believed that a viable minimum group of researchers - a critical mass - were required to come up with meaningful activity. I suffered for more than a decade being a lone CS researcher at IISc. The other but  most important aspect was that I will miss interactions with young and fresh students. I had a belief that association with young minds is essential to keep our mind sharp and searching. I recalled the fact that Sir CV Raman was not in favor of setting up CSIR labs by Nehru and Bhatnagar. 
I felt a university with a strong research culture and teaching with a great ambience for work is the well suited place for  me. So it had to be only IISc  for me. That was keeping me happy in my life. Plus my interests in  multiple areas of research and many other activities made me reject the offer.
 I had done this , rejecting offers, many times during my career. If I had taken up every offer that came my way , how would I have developed myself and would I have been happy? Now,  I think providence helped me a lot in rejecting those offers. Good sense prevailed. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
12/06/24, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 522
Mr Bala Ajjampur has some more comments. 
“Sir, conscious living is affected in many ways by how interactions take place and where it takes place with the world that is presented to us whether we want it that way or not. Right now, we are in a world of social media platforms that are increasing exponentially, and interactions similarly are getting chaotic.
Is social media a bane or a boon or both? My take is that it is both. It is a boon to connect with dear ones wherever they are. It is a bane when the same platform is used for bullying, shaming, and scamming.
To reduce the incidents of these undesirable situations on the social media, I happened to hear the ceo of newscorp Australia, proposing a social licensing tool similar to media licensing used to curate what and how the contents are published on newspapers by journalists only after fact checking the articles published. Even the articles selected for publication go through a process of relevance, appropriateness, etc.
But on social media, the platform presents itself as the owner of the channel, but not the content.
So the licensing is an idea proposed to regulate what they can channel, to whom they can channel, and how they can channel. 
Do you have any ideas on how this tool can be used not only to regulate, but also to create a body of experts who can work continuously to improve the licensing in such a way that it remains meaningful as the world changes with technology?”
My response 
The questions seem to be :
How do you instill good character and good behavior in people?
Does regulation help in it? 
Will regulation avoid fakes  and cheats?
Will AI help in this?
Comments please.
Greetings 
Dks
12/06/24, 5:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: FAER is doing evaluation of its students projects next week - 17 th to 22 June. 
We need judges to evaluate.
Evaluation is done online in the afternoon between 230 to 430pm. We are short of people. 
Are you available for three afternoons. ,?
Appreciate your response.
Greetings 
Dks
12/06/24, 7:55 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Thanks for the invitation. I got the message from Dr. Gopi as well. As I have recently joined REVA University and there is already a crisis situation, I am sorry that I will not be able to join. I will send a good substitute from RV University who has worked in IBM, HP and Motorola and is very hands-on professor of practice. He has been in academics now for over 7 years guiding student projects in all domains.
13/06/24, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 384
I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did 
I wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite  necessary. 
Walden,      Thoreau 

After returning from Pune, I told Mr Anagol, secretary to CM and science and technology,  about pani panchayat. He liked the idea and suggested that we should explore that in Karnataka. I talked to Mr Bhattacharya,  secretary , rural development and panchayat Raj. But we couldn't take it forward. 
We were looking at increasing the tree cover in the state in a sustainable, environment friendly way. There were many experiments going on in the country. Bharatiya  Agro Industries Foundation had been working on many livelihood experiments.  So while at Pune, I arranged for a visit to BAIF.
I also visited Uruli kanchan village near Pune to look at the activities of BAIF. They were propagating the planting of a babul tree christened as subabul. They had done a good job of propagating this tree. They created an economic model for a family and demonstrated it. 
At that time, Karnataka was also popularizing this species .  Our forest and agriculture departments were planting millions of saplings . It was found successful in Bijapur. We visited Bijapur and saw the saplings growing well. The agriculture department was responsible for this work. So we decided to conduct a two day seminar inviting all district deputy commissioners and CEOs of the Zilla panchayats. So I went again for the seminar - two visits to Bijapur. . The development commissioner inaugurated it. I met Mr Veerakyataiah who was the deputy secretary of the rural development department in that seminar. 
I went to Bellary on the way to Bijapur for the seminar   to look at the salinity problem in the downstream fields of the TB dam. The reason was seepage of water from one of the main canals into the fields. I met the DC- equivalent to district collector in many states-  of Bellary district , Mr Gokulram , a very nice person. The dam was managed by the central government and the state didn't have control over it. But the situation was bad. About 50000 ha of land was lost to cultivation.  I learnt one more aspect of negative design. Don't run a canal at a higher level to the adjoining fields or line them well. 
I didn't neglect my family activities. I attended my daughter's sports day . She got a cup . I attended my son's school day function. He was dressed like Bharati and he was in a boat along with his friend Nikhil. Nikhils father Kasturi and mother Uma  became our friends . We were in contact with them and are in touch with his mother and sisters . Unfortunately Nikhil died in a motorcycle accident in Mysore.  He was a very sweet smiling boy  . 
Another task was to get primary school admission for my son. So as my daughter was in KV IISc,  I applied for his admission. Some people objected to his admission as I was in the state government.  But I told the school that I was on lien from IISc and will return to IISc service shortly. So my son got admission in KV IISc.  Both children traveled to the  school by iisc bus together. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
14/06/24, 5:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 385
“There is one only defect in forgiving persons, and not another; that defect is that people take a forgiving person to be weak.
That defect, however, should not be taken into consideration, for forgiveness is a great power. Forgiveness is a virtue of the weak, and an ornament of the strong. “
Vidura niti

Let me discuss my role on the world environment day held on June 5,1982. 
We decided to conduct it for a week across the state , not just in Bangalore. We chose six cities. We chose an agency which has a mobile exhibit of environmental posters and some devices. The agency agreed to travel through the six centres. 
I visited Shimoga, Hubli, Belgaum , and Sirsi , not in that order. I went with my family. In Sirsi, I was taken to a falls - Mathighatta falls. It had a potential for a micro hydel plant. We stayed there for three days. I addressed a public meeting also in kannada. All my speeches were in Kannada now. My children went to Byrumbe and saw a different rural setting. They saw the arecanut plants, pepper and cardamom plants. My son liked the papad - jackfruit  papad - and he called it Byrumbe happala . He liked it a lot. We used to specially look for it in Bangalore or other cities  and buy it . 
I also had a very tight schedule on June 5 th at Bangalore. I talked in several functions from morning to evening including in  the University of agricultural sciences. I made a remark on vidhana soudha  that the canteen there was using half a ton of firewood every day for cooking . We needed to reduce this. It came as a front page bold box item in the newspapers the next day stating that Soudha logs a half ton everyday. Prof CNR Rao also talked in a meeting. His talk didn't appear in the paper. He commented on this to me the next day. 
There were a number of pollution cases pending both with the government and courts. The pollution control board was not effective. While the secretary was clear in his statements, the chairman was evasive , giving excuses instead of action. He was good at inventing excuses. 
The finance minister ,Mr Veerappa Moily called a meeting. He was also the tourism minister. He was worried about the impact of pollution on our monuments. Two important tourism spots were Belur and Shravanabelagola . Belur has the famous chennakeshava temple and shravanabelagola has the lord gomateshwara statue.  
There was a plywood factory close to the Chennakeshava temple. They burnt the waste plywoods in their boiler. The chemical fumes affected the small soapstone figurines in the temple.
The minister wanted us to stop that factory producing chemical fumes. According to the board , the factory doesn't want to change the boiler to oil firing. They said they had no legal mechanism to take action. The case was going on for several years. The board got strong technical opinion from Prof AR Vasudevamurthy , our IPC professor. He said these fumes coming out of the factory will destroy the figurines over time.  The board didn't take action for five years. The minister asked me to visit and submit a report. 
Similarly , a lot of quarrying work was going on in the hills on which the huge lord gomateshwara statue was located. The minister wanted that to be stopped. 
Let me discuss the next steps in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
14/06/24, 5:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Mr Bala has more comments:
I am not sure how a person's personality can be changed through regulations as the traits of that personality may have to be altered to change a person from a bad person to a good person. It can be viewed as moving away from a certain set of undesired values towards another set of desired values. 
How each person constructs a certain  personality can be nurtured through multiple stimulation points comprising of a sense of belonging to family or religion or national or community values. 
Nurturing transitioning into regulation, or should, needs to be determined in terms of both time and the level of regulation. 
The level of regulation should be dependent on the level of nurturing that has or has not taken place before a person transitions into adulthood. 
So it comes to each individual family getting some help to nurture their offsprings into adulthood. When this help is lacking or not available, regulation might be the way to go to decide the time and the level.

This is not a solution by any means but comments that are intended to help a move towards a solution.
My response 
Nil
Greetings 
Dks
15/06/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 386
“Righteousness is the one highest good; and forgiveness is the one supreme peace; knowledge is one supreme contentment; and benevolence, one sole happiness. “
Vidura niti

I visited the two places - Shravanabelagola and Belur both in Hassan district - along with the chairman of the board, superintending archaeologist, and the DC of Hassan district .  We first went to shravanabelagola as it was on the way. We saw the extensive quarrying going on in both hills - vindhyagiri and chandragiri- and felt bad. But I was surprised at the reaction of the archeology department. They looked unconcerned.
 We visited the temple at Belur next. It is a temple with a remarkable architecture , sculpture and arts. It was constructed by the Hoysala  King vishnuvardhana. He was converted to Vaishnavism by Sri Ramanuja. But his wife Shantala remained a jain. She showed a lot of interest in the temple construction. The temple at halebid was also constructed in his time. The temple at Somnathpur was also constructed at this time - 12th or 13 th century. Jakkannacharya was the architect for both temples.   There are several stone panels with soapstone carvings of many aspects of life . It is a famous world tourist attraction with no tourist infrastructure. We saw the effect of pollution on the flag pole - dhwaja stambha.  It had become black. I wasn't  happy even  with the puja being done in the  temple. Temple lamps and camphor are producing vapors. They can also affect the sculptures and arts. 
On my return from Hassan   ,  I submitted a report to the chief secretary on the sad state of affairs.  Mr R A Naik had become the chief secretary by then. So he called a meeting , and the revenue secretary was also present  . He said that action can be taken even under the public nuisance act  . I suggested that there is a rule in the museums act on actions to be taken against those defacing the monuments.  so I said we can take actions on that basis  . It was decided to issue directions to DC and SP of Hassan to stop both activities. I prepared the directions - it is the first time to format a direction and I did it within an hour and I quoted the rule in the museums act and in pollution control act  , and took it to the CS- and it was issued under the CS signature  immediately within an hour of the meeting . I skipped my lunch that day. 
The SP immediately seized the trucks by the quarrying person in Shravanabelagola   . He also sealed the plywood factory . So we saw action,  where the board was sleeping for more than five years. 
It was a satisfying moment for me. 
Greetings 
Dks
16/06/24, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 387

The Supreme Good (results) from the knowledge, produced by a particular dharma, of the essence of the Predicables, 
Substance, Attribute, Action, Genus, Species, and Combination, 
by means of their resemblances and differences. 
Classification and properties 
Vaiseshika

There were several water pollution problems with most of the rivers in Karnataka.  As an additional secretary of environment, I had to address this aspect also. I got a complaint from Nanjangudu city  about the contamination of drinking water. I went on an inspection trip along with the board chairman. I found that most industries in that area were discharging their waste water without treatment. Most industries resist setting up  treatment plants and operating them .  Also  there was another design error in water intake for city water supply   The drinking water to the city is from the Kabini River. The inlet for the drinking water was placed after the wastewater was  discharged by the industries.  So  ,  only polluted water was supplied to houses  . It was not potable. We had a public meeting. Industries were not prepared to treat their waste water. They wanted the government to put up treatment plants. I told them that there is a law which restricts the BOD , COD and other elements in their wastewater discharges . They were not even removing the suspended particles by a simple filter. 
I also told them that BOD means energy. Put up a simple biogas plant and use the gas to fire their boilers. Biogas technology is pretty simple enough to implement and run. I told them that they are violating the law. The law also wanted them to get consent from the pollution control board and most had not obtained consent. The chairman of the board was present and he kept quiet. 
I said that we don't want to take them to the court for action. So it was in their interest to treat the water. Otherwise the municipality may taken action on them with people's agitation growing day by day with increased awareness of the reasons for pollution. 
But the industrialists felt that they can't afford a treatment plant. 
There were many such water pollution problems in the state. There was a rayon factory in Harihar city on the banks of Tnga Bhadra River. They used wood to produce the Fibre and discarded the lignin and chemicals into the river without treatment. It affected the health of people living downstream of the river  and people didn't get proper potable water. This case was in the courts for years. Solution was not possible. Because the only solution was to close down the factory. As cotton was available in plenty and a mix of cotton with terene/ nylon became popular, the demand for rayon went down. The factory closed down after several years due to a lack of demand for rayon fibre. That shows their regard for people and environment  . 
Greetings
Dks
17/06/24, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 388
“17. Doubt  arises  from  the  perception  of  (the  object  containing)  the  general  property,  the  non-perception  of  the  differentia,  and the  recollection  of  the  alternatives,  all  at  once  or  in  one  act  of thought.  “
18.   “  And  that  which  is  seen,  resembles  that  which  was  seen  — (this  also  is  the  source  of  Doubt.)”  - perceptional errors. 
“ And  that  which  is  seen,  resembles  that  which  was  seen  — (this  also  is  the  source  of  Doubt.)  “
Vaiseshika 

There were complaints of air pollution from the ammasandra cement factory. We had passed just passed the air act in the assembly. I was told that the act can't be implemented without framing rules. So we started to frame the rules. The rules had to be approved by the law department.  So it took time to get the rules approved. 
Let me talk about some of  my visits. 
I went to Mercara along with my family .  We stayed in the Harangi dam guest house. I got the best room . I was told that the CM used to stay in that room. The CM , Mr Gundu Rao,  was from Coorg , kodagu. 
I met the chief engineer in charge of the dam. While we were walking on the dam , my son ,a toddler then, started running . One side of the dam was deep with stored water and another side the spillway. I panicked. We caught him. It was an embarrassing moment for me. 
I met Mr Yellappa Reddy, the district forest officer at that time. It was my first meeting with him. I continued my association with him for many years. He became a good friend for a long time. He showed me a simple water retention method near a young sapling by creating a small saucer round the tree. I met his friend who was running a wood / furniture workshop in Mercara. We went round Mercara city . It was very beautiful. 
While returning from Harangi dam to Bangalore, we visited the Nagarhole forest trying to see a tiger. We didn't see any. We only saw a dead elephant. We returned to bangalore via Mysore.  
Later , we visited Bandipur forest separately to attend a summer camp.  There was a forest / nature camp for school children. I gave a talk  . My children had an elephant safari. It was a very pleasant stay there. 

There was a conference and  exhibition organised on behalf of the food processing society. Mr Panduranga shetty was organising the conference. I requested Prof Dharmananda Rao , principal , MCE, Hassan to set up a stall there to demonstrate the areca leaf cup making machine developed by the college. 
I visited Hidkal dam near Belgaum to inaugurate an all India NSS camp. The students were planting fruit trees there. Prof Hegde, retired from the engineering college , Guindy also came with me. 
I attended a one week program on environment at ASCI - administrative staff College of India,  Hyderabad.  Most engineers supported development . They didn't worry about the environment. Dr Bowonder , who was a student at iisc during my wardenship  , was a faculty member at ASCI. I took his help in buying some bangles for Anu, my daughter. He was given the assignment to study the proposal on the Bedthi project. He told me that they would be recommending a thermal project instead of the Bedthi project. That closed the chapter on the Bedthi project. He also felt sad that engineers opposed environmental concerns. 
More in the next .
Greetings 
Dks
18/06/24, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  389
21, Doubt  (arises)  also  from  science  and  nescience.  
22.  (Doubt     is   arises  from that   observed    both    in    respect   in    of    Sound),    because    its  difference (from)  homogeneous  objects  and   (from)  heterogeneous  objects. 
Vaiseshika 

Let me continue to discuss my visits .
I visited Hyderabad again to attend a seminar at NRSA and met Dr Deekshatulu who was the director of NRSA. It was a one day seminar. I met Ethirajulu , a long time friend and a student of the EE department of IISc. Afterwards I returned to Bangalore.
Another concern came up and needed my attention.  
Some universities wanted to abandon the project work by BE students. I was aghast at this development. KSCST will lose a major program. I talked to Mr Anagol and we decided to have a meeting of the vice chancellors of our state universities - VIT ,and  medical and other universities were yet to come up. We organised a meeting at Mysore. We both left in the morning , went to Srirangapatna and then to Rangannathittu on the way to Mysore. We took a boat ride and saw the birds. After this visit to the bird sanctuary located on an island in Cauvery - Cauvery splits into two and joins after srirangapatna- , we left for Mysore. 
We told the VCs the importance of team work, end to end problem solving, design experience that will be built with project work  . After discussions , all VCs agreed to continue project work with vigour. 
We also told them about funding opportunities on projects of relevance to the state. We said we didn't receive any proposal from the universities. 
Soon, we got proposals from Karnatak University containing proposals on water pollution. We sanctioned them .
I was invited by the karnataka university for a lecture. I went and gave two talks, one on water pollution and another on renewable energy . I met Prof Nanjundappa, the VC of the university. He was the planning secretary before and I had met him in vidhana soudha several times. I told him that Karnataka university needs a good computer centre. He was against computers saying it will reduce employment. I told him that my suggestion was to modernise the research in science departments and it had nothing to do to computerise his administration. I also told him that I was with the UGC committee on giving grants for computers to universities. I had visited universities in Andhra and Kerala and granted mini computers to them , but I am not able to do anything for Karnataka. Universities in Karnataka lived in blissful ignorance of the computers and their uses - this nearly two decades after the advent and use of computers in India.  The VC looked agreeable to getting UGC funding,  but did nothing afterward. That is the problem with rigid minds and rigid beliefs. You shouldn't allow an organization to stagnate or die because of your stupid belief. 
Let me discuss the behaviors of heads of organizations in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
19/06/24, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 390
“25.  The  resemblance  (of  Sound),  although  it  is  an  Attribute, with  Actions,  consists  in  its  speedy  destruction. 
26.     no  (Sound  does  not  exist  before  utterance),  because    there   is mark  of  (Sound  as)  evident  (before   utterance),  
27.  (Sound  is  not  something  which  only  requires  to  be brought  to  light),  because  it  differs  in  property  from  what  is eternal.  “
Vaiseshika 

One important thing in every one's life is to answer the questions:
How do I live my life? 
What are the qualities one should acquire and what qualities one should discard? 
How do I  acquire good qualities?
Let me discuss my life.  I got guidance from my father, grandfather  , uncles initially,  then from my teachers , friends and colleagues. There was a lot of learning through observations of human behaviors. I did a lot of introspection to learn from many mistakes I made during my interactions and due to my actions. But I also learnt a lot from observing many leaders . I had good interactions with many academic , industry, bank and government leaders. I found that attitudes and behaviors of many leaders are different and success does not have a cocktail of a few fixed behaviors.  It is multidimensional and depends on flexibilty, adaptation and a quick understanding of the existing situation inside and outside as well as  adjustments to the existing reality .  I summarize some of my learnings.
I met a large number of heads of institutions- industry CEOs, IIT directors , university vice chancellors, chairmen and principals of colleges , heads of government  , secretaries, ministers, chairmen / MDs of banks,trustees of NGOs , spiritual leaders etc. There was a continuity of looking at successors in many , to name a few-  industries like Tatas, TCS, Wipro, kirloskar electric  ,banks like  Indian Bank, corporation Bank, PNB  , syndicate bank, Vijaya bank, universities like Bangalore, Mysore, Karnataka,  directors of IITs  and NITs  , principals of many colleges like SSIT, SIT, RVCE, MSRIT, BMSCE,  SDMCE, TCE, MCE, BIET, UBDTCE, NMAMIT, and many secretaries of government departments. This continous contacts and observations helped in my understanding different leadership styles and their impacts on the organization.  

It was my serious hobby to study them, observe their decision making capacities , their approach to problems, their success rates, their support structures  etc. I have participated in hundreds of decisions by many such heads. It was a rewarding experience and definitely a learning experience. I learnt many pitfalls , many strict no nos, many good approaches. I can write a book. I have consolidated some observations and will share them here.
 Let me categorize many heads of organizations as:
Those who didn't do anything worthwhile, but allowed the organization to run.
Those who followed the rules strictly without discretion . A clerk can do this job. You don't need a senior officer or manager for this job. Most colleges, government offices follow this model. When I became the dean , I told my deputy registrar that he should follow rules and I will break the rules with enough reason. When necessary , I will go to the senate to approve  a different decision.  
Those who don't delegate work . I know a principal of an engineering college who will spend several minutes sanctioning a casual one day leave to an employee . He spent his time only on such trivial matters.  I was sitting with him and   saw this  happening  . I know a chairman of KEB who will handle power failure problems in the houses of people, not necessarily his friends. He was still doing operational jobs of an assistant engineer, not strategic ones. 
There are some who delegate everything . I know a HoD who did post office work. As soon as he got a paper or request or letter, he will pass it on to a faculty , maybe randomly. If the person to whom he forwarded a paper says that it is not in his domain, the HoD will ask him a suggestion as to whom it should go and forwarded accordingly. 
More In the next
Greetings
Dks
19/06/24, 4:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 523
Bala Ajjampur commented further:
“Sir, while researching the numbers to support or invalidate my nurture vs regulate theory,  I came across this book. I am curious to know what you think. Thanks.”
“..and at what level of education can we say the purpose of education is served?”
My response
Good comments and questions.  Let me go step by step to address the problem. 
First:
Conscious living is not good living or ideal living . It is the first step in living. 
We need many more steps. One of the important steps is to develop proper  social skills. 
Behaviours are normally built at childhood by the family in the  house, teachers and classmates in the  school and people in the society. Normally it stays with us. 
But it is very different now. There are powerful influencers. Lots of people listen to these influencers.  Influencers used to be religious and pious people in the early days. But not so. There are powerful social and political influencers  today , hundreds of them flooding YouTube with venom  . They don't follow any rules or laws, don't care about impacts. So we need to  put the fear of god on the influencers. So regulation is definitely needed. Fake news is a bigger and hidden menace. It can destroy people .  Only regulation can resolve this. 
 Punish them for missteps or fakes or misuses. 
So we need a stricter law. Apologies won't do. They are meaningless  . Here we need regulation. 
Also it is not an either or situation. We cannot ignore nurture and education. We seem to be ignoring this aspect of education  both at the family level and school level. 
Let me expand it in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
20/06/24, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 391
“These two persons never shine because of their incompatible acts, viz., a householder without exertion, and a beggar busied in schemes. “
“These two, O king, live (as it were) in a region higher than heaven itself, viz., a man of power endued with forgiveness, and poor man that is charitable.”
Vidura niti

Let me continue my observations further. 
There are those who don't take decisions at all  . They delay decisions hoping problems disappear. I know one HoD at IISc who used to put papers inside his desk without taking action. 
Those who took decisions based on a trusted person's advice. This is a coterie based leadership. 
The above six do not reflect initiative, but don't destroy the organization. 

The most important component I saw in most leaders is the commitment to work. While most were committed to their work, some were committed to social causes also. There were many who wanted a better Bangalore.  I saw the pursuit of Mr AS Lakshman  , chairman, Senapathy whitlay company  for the growth of industries in bangalore. I also saw the phenomenal interest that Mr SG Ramachandra , senior VP, kirloskar electric Ltd,  took in the matters of Bangalore and energy development . He also ran the Gokhale institute branch at Malleswaram. Mr Agarwal ,MD of Bhoruka group showed interest in bangalore's water and power problems. 
Another component that I saw in some was the great interpersonal communication skills exhibited by them . Some like Ramadorai , CEO of TCS are very soft spoken and don't get angry. Some are pleasant and tough . Mr KC Reddy who became secretary to the PWD department in the government of Karnataka and also held many senior positions was a pleasant person . Another quality I saw in him was his active participation in helping his subordinates, in encouraging them and in promoting them. Mr. Karumuthu kannan, a textile magnate and chairman of TCE , was another pleasant person interested in the progress of his college and also in the general growth of the state. 
Those who had strong beliefs and likes and dislikes and took the organization in their desired path. This curbs the progress of the organization and creates discords. 
This may lead to chaos in the organization and a lot of unhappiness. 
There are some who are power and status hungry. They are self centred. Many managements of private engineering colleges that I knew personally , were ignorant of academics and education and concentrated mostly on the construction and day to day firefighting. They retained control on everything and didn't give freedom to the principal. That was the negative side. 
There are some who strongly believed that discipline and total obedience  are the only aspects needed to run an organization. Many institutions were run on this premise. They produced slaves. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
21/06/24, 5:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 392
The  universal  experience  of  the  objects  of  the  senses  is the  mark  of  (the  existence  of)  object  different  from  the  senses  and their  objects.
  Perception    (as  a  mark  inferring  the  body  or  the  senses  as substratum)  (is)  a  false  mark.  
We see Sankaracharya's concept of Maya coming from here. 
Vaiseshika 

There are some who are flexible and open minded ,but weak and take decisions democratically by listening to all. It may weaken the organization. Courage is essential in leadership. Compassion is needed upto a limit. Decide whether your priority is your organization or your people. If the organization survives, then only the people in it will survive. 
There are many great learners who also put in a lot of effort  . Most leaders from family business and first time entrepreneurs fall in this category. I had seen a person like Mr K Easwaran, director of Easun Engineering company and MD of Hackbridge Hewittic and Easun , who didn't know any engineering and had no engineering background. He built his business from nothing. He was a first time entrepreneur. But his grasp was amazing. He had great language skills. I had a lot of encounters with him. He pinpointed the fallacy in an argument and detected problems in advance ,and  didn't wait for them to happen. He visited the factory everyday. He knew the market, the economics and customers. But most importantly  ,  his interpersonal skills were great and wonderful. He wasn't biased. He got good talents from across india. I met many non-Tamils in the factory for the first time including a Britisher.  He assessed people, built long term relationships and maintained cordial relationships with customers, competitors, governments and suppliers. He personally used to take all heads and senior officers  of electricity boards and government heads through the factory explaining every aspect of production and quality control  . He understood marketing better. I know some MDs who considered marketing inferior to production. That is a biased mindset. This is a lesson for startups to learn and follow.

There are some deep thinkers, who analyzed the problems, discussed the problems with others and made decisions. Some had multiple interests.  Mr Jayakumar Anagol is a good example . Mr V Balasubramanian,  who became the secretary to the CM - Mr. Ramakrishna Hegde who became the CM after Mr. Gundu Rao-  after Mr Anagol was also an inventor. 
There are disciplined and focused thinkers and implementers and innovators  with a broad view of the world  like Sir M V . He was also a multidimensional thinker and visionary. His self  discipline is famous.
The biggest mistake the governments commit today is the belief that managing an organization is purely based on administration and regulation. So they think the generalist IAS will manage anything. In today's world or even yesterday's world, this is not true. Organizations depend on people. Most ignore that. Secondly , organizations depend on transformations. Most government organizations run with a mind of  vegetables- instead of a thinking mind. While operational aspects are important, transformations lead to long term survival. Thirdly, motivation and innovation are to be encouraged. These are missing today. Why do we find most government departments and public sectors used dated policies and dated approaches? That is because of the straight jacket approach of the bosses and total faith in rules . That is why private systems thrive . Government systems stagnate. Occasional sparks keep the government systems moving forward. That is mostly accidental or political. I am not even talking about corruption and servile behaviors.  
More in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
21/06/24, 5:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 524
The problems raised by Bala Ajjampur are less serious, but important , compared to other life skills that our education system ignores. 
That  second aspect is interpersonal skills. I quote the following from David Brooks’  book “How to know a person”.
“Being open-hearted is a prerequisite for being a full, kind, and wise human being. But it is not enough. People need social skills. We talk about the importance of “relationships,” “community,” “friendship,” “social connection,” but these words are too abstract. The real act of, say, building a friendship or creating a community involves performing a series of small, concrete social actions well: disagreeing without poisoning the relationship; revealing vulnerability at the appropriate pace; being a good listener; knowing how to end a conversation gracefully; knowing how to ask for and offer forgiveness; knowing how to let someone down without breaking their heart; knowing how to sit with someone who is suffering; knowing how to host a gathering where everyone feels embraced; knowing how to see things from another’s point of view.
These are some of the most important skills a human being can possess, and yet we don’t teach them in school. Some days it seems like we have intentionally built a society that gives people little guidance on how to perform the most important activities of life. As a result, a lot of us are lonely and lack deep friendships. It’s not because we don’t want these things. Above almost any other need, human beings long to have another person look into their face with loving respect and acceptance. It’s that we lack practical knowledge about how to give each other the kind of rich attention we desire. I’m not sure Western societies were ever great at teaching these skills, but over the past several decades, in particular, there’s been a loss of moral knowledge. Our schools and other institutions have focused more and more on preparing people for their careers, but not on the skills of being considerate toward the person next to you. The humanities, which teach us what goes on in the minds of other people, have become marginalized. And a life spent on social media is not exactly helping people learn these skills. On social media you can have the illusion of social contact without having to perform the gestures that actually build trust, care, and affection. On social media, stimulation replaces intimacy. There is judgment everywhere and understanding nowhere.”
So the purpose is social skills plus job skills  . Job skills alone are useless if social skills are missing. 
But does education fulfill this purpose. The answer is no. The earlier Indian gurukula system was holistic. It taught them manners, behaviours,  habits, attitudes , habits etc. It gave directions to lead a humane life  . But it is not so now  .
We don’t have a solution  now . Maybe an individual AI assistant seems to be one answer. One to one teaching   attention to each student, education tailored to each students capabilities and needs are possible through specially tailored AI tools. Special individual AI assistant will be able to mentor and guide a person to master social skills. It may also be a fake reducer. 
Greetings 
Dks
22/06/24, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 393
“autobiography is much too grand a word. It suggests a purposeful study of one’s whole life. It implies names, dates and places in tidy chronological order. What I want is to plunge my hand into a lucky dip and come up with a handful of assorted memories.”
Agatha Christie 

Let me continue my learning about many leaders. 
One aspect worried me a lot. Where are the ideas coming into an organization?  A good leader should have ideas to improve the systems. Leaders should come with ideas and goals and keep modifying them. Or leaders should get ideas from the society or experts or even common man  . Let me give examples: Kohli stumbled on the idea of IT services and it kept TCS going for a long time. It became a model followed by many IT services companies like Infosys,  Wipro,  HCL tech, etc.  Ramadorai scouted for ideas. He was always on the lookout . He saw opportunities for outsourcing,  total services and transformation  . He moved to communications, security , data centres , total banking and many other sectors .  Chandra made digital as his priority focus. Later both  realized that cloud computing is coming and started ION . ION became a major Indian cloud agency. Chandra realized the great potential of a total technology based exam management system with high confidence and integrity. He saw a huge business there. It happened. Then, Chandra saw AI on the horizon and got researchers developing IGNEO ,an AI system which is running for more than 10 years now. Now all IT companies are jumping into genAI. They get ideas of new applications for AI tools. Their ideas came from customers and technology developers.  They merged both sets of ideas. 
I Saw an idea going through stages of implementation. The idea started with a discussion I had with Mr MBN Rao, CMD, Indian bank. I was an IT advisor to Indian bank at that time. The question was “ there are more than 70 to 80 percent of the population who don't bank at all. So how do we bring unbanked people into the banking system?” I said we need to simplify the procedures of opening and managing accounts  . I said we need to take this in a mission mode and routine processes won't help. Just like cards management was outsourced we need to do this in that mode. I also said we need a device to help the rural population. After coming back to Bangalore, I talked to Mahesh Jain, chairman, Integra micro systems. He liked my idea and went about working on that. He built a system on a laptop with a couple of devices hooked up - cameras , printers etc. It was demonstrated to both MBN Rao and Sambamurty,  ED at that time  . MBN Rao wasn't convinced. But Sambamurthy liked the idea . I told Mahesh that we need to build an integral device to onboard customers and do their transactions. So our search to build a device began. I came up with a functional requirements. Then we searched the market for devices. I even went to exhibitions in Singapore for two successive years . We didn't find any device. The devices I saw weren't satisfactory. So Integra decided to build a device. After a few false starts, we got a device , named it as imfast . By this time Sambamurthy moved to corporation Bank as CMD  . He asked Ramachandran to start looking at branch less banking  . He was happy with imfast demo and entrusted this work to Integra.  That heralded the financial inclusion era in banking. It has grown by leaps and bounds now . Now there is a new organizational structure of servers, settlements, business associates and mobile banking. We are able to do direct transfer of benefits to chores of people , eliminating middleman and corruption. So ideas will lead to disruptive innovation.
It was a great satisfying experience for us 
More in the next.
Greetings.
Dks
23/06/24, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 394
“There are two levels to belief. There’s the surface level, which our coaches, teachers, therapists, and parents love to preach. “Believe in yourself,” they all say, as if the thought alone can keep us afloat when the odds are against us in the battle of our lives. But once exhaustion sets in, doubt and insecurity tend to penetrate and dissipate that flimsy brand of belief.
Then there’s the belief born in resilience. It comes from working your way through layers of pain, fatigue, and reason, and ignoring the ever-present temptation to quit until you strike a source of fuel you didn’t even know existed. One that eliminates all doubt,makes you certain of your strength and the fact that eventually, you will prevail, so long as you keep moving forward. That is the level of belief that can defy the expectations of scientists and change everything. It’s not an emotion to be shared or an intellectual concept, and nobody else can give it to you. It must bubble up from within.”
David Goggins , Never Finished.



Let me continue my discussions about leaders.

Another  aspect worries me here. Many big companies like Birlas, Kirloskars , TVS , Mahindra , Mafatlal, Surya and several more jumped into IT services. Most had an idea that IT is a great business . I had discussions with many companies who showed interest in starting an IT business. But they had no concept of a totally different business thinking and models required for IT. So many failed in the eighties. Some came back with niche areas and established success. Mindset change and transformative approaches are essential .
 A cable manufacturing company wanted to go for microwave ovens manufacturing in the late eighties  . But they decided to skip it. I told them that time is not right.  
Unfortunately, most hardware companies like  NELCo, Uptron, DCM, ORG, Pertech , Zenith, etc stopped hardware manufacture. Companies like Wipro  , HCL  , Patni computers closed down hardware operations and moved into software. Many trading companies like Computronix, Hinditron,  closed down operations. Today, we are dominated by foreign companies for hardware supply and Chinese companies for mobile phones and Taiwanese companies for chips. Indian manufacturing still struggles.
Most training institutions also didn't survive. These are due to a focus on a single product and rigidity ,- no resilience. 
One key aspect that is underlying with most  good leaders is alertness and seeing through the apparent reality. Apparent reality is created by misinformation,  fake information and wrong analysis by his associates. It is a great asset to see through this nor only inside the organization , but also outside.  This is a critical requirement for bankers .
 I knew one chairman of a private engineering college who appointed his village people in lower skill jobs in the college and got inputs from them about the activities of the principal and faculty. The principal was a decent person and a friend of mine. Such practices are not acceptable. 
Today's leaders need to get a reasonable level of utilization of  technology in society. Success depends on the transformations needed at regular intervals. Nothing is static or stagnant. Most organizations  are dynamic and subject to internal and external changes. This means that we need both knowledge inside the well and also outside, both birds eye view and worm's views. 
There are some who had phenomenal clarity and knew what to do next to take the organization forward. N Chandra of TCS and now chair of Tata Sons is a great example. I admired his clarity of IT scenarios in the world. Another person with great clarity was Mr KC Chakraborty,  CMD, PNB, and Deputy governor, RBI. He was bold in taking decisions. He was the first to say that core banking should cover the entire bank , not just some branches. He asked the IT department in Indian bank and later PNB to go for core banking for all branches. We had difficulty with Infosys  to take up core banking for all branches of PNB. Only a simple threat worked. Whereas , TCS provided a vision for scaling up of the total  operations automation   for SBI. TCS surprisingly , took up as their first core banking implementation the largest bank with more than 9000 branches and succeeded in it. They concentrated on performance. They had domain knowledge and had a good collaboration . Staff of both - TCS and SBI were committed to successful Implementation.
More In the next.
Greetings 
Dks
23/06/24, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 525
The key to the solution remains with a major attitudinal change.
Treat a human being as a human being. 
Human beings need recognition as much as they need food and water. No crueler punishment can be devised than to not see someone, to render them unimportant or invisible. “The worst sin towards our fellow creatures is not to hate them,” George Bernard Shaw wrote, “but to be indifferent to them: that’s the essence of inhumanity.” To do that is to say: You don’t matter. You don’t exist.
Our school textbooks describe a household as one having a family and a servant. Servants are treated badly. 
When and how will we change and respect humans and nature? The how part is to deal with the purpose of education  . 

We are in the state as described by Antonio Gramaci. In 1930, while imprisoned by Mussolini’s fascist regime in Italy, the philosopher Antonio Gramsci wrote this in his prison notebooks: “The crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear.”
This will prolong with AI. 
We are moving from a centralized system to a decentralized system  . Today's power centre lies in YouTube not TV. 
Let me look at the book on “ Calling bullshit “ you quoted. It looks dystopian.  This depicts one side of the story  . I agree with you that the numbers are impressive. I have seen many such cases in superconductivity and in plagiarism. 
 There is a book on deceptive patterns by Brignull that looks at another side of problems about ecommerce deceptions. I read only about 70 pages of the bullshiting book. It is good , but one-sided. The book  talks about ambiguous statements through many examples and looks at the effort required. It says deception is easy , but disproving it is costly and slow. It affects the society. I recall the scare of BCG vaccination that happened in the seventies. Both books look at deception, very useful ones no doubt. But won't give a solution to the problem of improving the life structure and systems. 
  Is there a third side? Look at Hindu philosophy for an answer.
Let me look at it in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
24/06/24, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 395
“Unfortunately you often wish not only to remember, but also to talk about what you remember. And this, you have to tell yourself repeatedly, is boring for other people. Why should they be interested in what, after all, is your life, not theirs? “
Agatha Christie 
This tells me that I am in that state. Should I not stop boring the people and stop writing these posts torturing people? That is the thought occuring in me . 

There are some leaders who are goal oriented . They are doers and motivators. Ramadorai, CEO of TCS is the best example for goal setting , and achieving the goals through motivation. He set up clear ,attainable, and  time bound goals for TCS. 
There are those who find out the defects of an organization , correct them and give a new directional push . I know many such people. I remember Mr Krishnamurthy who became the chairman of Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd  , Bhopal stabilized  it and grew it to great heights. It is still doing well . They are partly flexible. Prof Prahlada Rao of MSRIT and Prof Holla of RVCE are good examples of this category. But my best example is Mr B Sambamurty.  I knew him as GM of Syndicate bank, ED of Indian Bank, CMD of Corporation Bank and director of IDRBT. He played many roles. He was working constantly to reconstruct his organization and make it grow into a new avatar. He understood the problems, had ideas and implemented corrective measures. 
There are some who had a vision and great intuitive knowledge and led the organization with their intuition. They took the organization to great heights. Prof CNR Rao is a good example for this. 
There are some who were courageous , very conscientious,  careful and deep thinkers . They  made decisions to take the organization forward. Mr Kohli is a great example for this . Mr H V Narayana Rao who was chairman of KEB, and later CEA was another example  . He was an  effortless , but correct decision maker. 
There are visionaries who take an organization to a great height. Prof .  S Dhawan is a great example for this. The way he built the department of space is remarkable. The success of the department even now is due to his vision , balanced and realistic approach and his commitment. He also took IISc to great heights , smoothened the processes , reformed the systems. 
There are thinkers , visionaries and planners who build new organizations.  JN Tata is definitely one in this category. Dhawan is another.
There are some  charmers , very charming persons ,  who spoke well and captivated people. Nehru is a good example. I have no personal knowledge here but I have seen Nehru several times , definitely as an onlooker and saw how his charm was working on the people. 
There are some  very courageous , brute force deciders like Madame Indira Gandhi . I didn't have a direct experience  of interaction with her. One indirect experience was the opportunity to redesign Delhi electric supply system due to the power failure in her meeting.


Greetings 
Dks
25/06/24, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 396
“
Law schools, business schools, and medical schools, music conservatories and athletic
programs, all strive to harness the latent power of the human brain to deliver ever
higher levels of achievement, to provide an edge in a world that is increasingly
competitive. Through the sheer force of human ingenuity, we have devised systems to free our brains of clutter, to help us keep track of details that we can’t trust ourselves
to remember. All of these and other innovations are designed either to improve the brain we have, or to off-load some of its functions to external sources.”
Daniel Levitin  organized mind.

I also had personal experience and exposure to some chief ministers of Karnataka like Nijalingappa, Gundu Rao, Ramakrishna Hegde,  Veerappa Moily,  JH Patel, SM Krishna . I had interactions with Ramakrishna Hegde.  He had a lot of ideas on governance. His major contribution was on Panchayat Raj.  He became CM after Gundu Rao.  The state was in some kind of chaos. The first thing he did was to order the arrest of all charge sheeted rowdies. The city became calm within a few days. He was accessible to all. Even after becoming CM , he used to come into IISc for morning walks. I used to meet him and also saw that many outsiders coming to meet him with their problems. I met Mt Abdul Nazeer Saab, his minister for rural development, also known as neer Saab because he was very active in getting rural water supply to most villages. He was encouraged by Ramakrishna Hegde.  I met him with Prof Narasimhan of TIFR. 
Another interesting reform was in governance. He had an excellent secretary, Mr V Balasubramanian.  So he would prepare a one page note on each file . Ramakrishna Hegde would go through and apply his mind before arriving at a decision. That was his intellectual capability. He was a workaholic  . There was one occasion where I was involved with him. He wanted his office to be equipped with computers. It was 1984 or 85. I was advising the office - Mr Gokulram was a deputy secretary in the CMs office then - on the selection of computers. I asked Gokulram what functions the CM wanted the computers to do. I was told that he wanted to use it for transfers of officers - a major and high pressure activity of the secretariat.  So I selected a vendor - HCL and the server and PCs. That showed his reform mind. He did a lot in a short period . 
The other CM who is also a thinker and intellectual is Mr SM Krishna. I had met him several times when he was minister, then deputy CM and then CM. He was keen on developing the state. He devised a new major project called Mahithisindhu , the objective was to provide computer education and computer based education to 1000 government high schools, most in rural areas . It was a very ambitious program  . I was advisor for this project and will discuss it later in detail. 
I met Mr Veerappa Moily as a finance minister in 1982 and later as CM. He used to say he became CM because of an act of me and others. He was another intellectual. 
To sum up my views on leaders, I found 
1.Many just survived in an organization. Most managements and principals fall in this category.
2. Many stabilized an organization giving it a direction and goal. 
3.Many built mechanisms for growth and survival. 
4.Many took new transformative paths. 
5. Many took it to a higher level. 
6. Many created excellent organizations. 

That completes my discussions on leaders. 
Greetings. 
Dks
25/06/24, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 526
Hinduism defines many responsibilities for a ruler - raja dharma.
It is explained in kautilya's arthashastra and also in Mahabharata. It makes it the duty of the king to protect his subjects from all evil doers. That means good laws, detection of crimes, punishments, and giving fair justice. Manusmriti gives details of behaviors and punishments. 
The vedas say rtm vadishyami. They worship order, harmony and stability. 
It is understood that the world is filled with three types of people - 
Devas with high moral and noble characters and conduct.
Ausuras with evil mind and evil actions.
And
Common people with normal and innocent life. 
The world is filled with these three kinds of people. 
EF Schumacher says that the world is filled with both good and evil people. 
This offsets evil and balances the world into an acceptable living place. 
Only when evil dominates   the other people are in trouble. Our puranas say that at that time , a powerful divine avatar happens to remove/ destroy evil. We have seen many such instances in the past. 
So in the case of fake / disinformation also, we will find a solution. Already many alerts are happening in your mobile phone - blocking spams, alerting of frauds, protecting passwords, alerting you of clones , etc. Lots of researchers are working on fake detection algorithms. There is a lot of successes in this. There is a lot of work on creating alerts for dark and deceptive patterns. 
As I said AI will provide a great solution to this problem. 
Let me quote about our resilience.
David Giggins has written a book 
“Never finished”. I am quoting resilience from his book.
“There are two levels to belief. There’s the surface level, which our coaches, teachers, therapists, and parents love to preach. “Believe in yourself,” they all say, as if the thought alone can keep us afloat when the odds are against us in the battle of our lives. But once exhaustion sets in, doubt and insecurity tend to penetrate and dissipate that flimsy brand of belief.
Then there’s the belief born in resilience. It comes from working your way through layers of pain, fatigue, and reason, and ignoring the ever-present temptation to quit until you strike a source of fuel you didn’t even know existed. One that eliminates all doubt,makes you certain of your strength and the fact that eventually, you will prevail, so long as you keep moving forward. That is the level of belief that can defy the expectations of scientists and change everything. It’s not an emotion to be shared or an intellectual concept, and nobody else can give it to you. It must bubble up from within.”
David Goggins , Never Finished.
Another important factor is humans work towards sharpening their intellect and mind. They collaborate and adapt . 
David Levitin in his book organised mind says
“We humans have a long history of pursuing neural enhancement—ways to
improve the brains that evolution gave us. We train them to become
more dependable and efficient allies in helping us to achieve our goals.”
So we are on the track. 
Greetings
Dks
26/06/24, 5:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 397
“The genial rain ambrosia call: The world but lasts while rain shall fall.
The rain begets the food we eat  And forms a food and drink concrete.
Unless the fruitful shower descend, The ploughman's sacred toil must end.” 
Thirukkural

Let me return to my job in the Karnataka government. 
Let me look at some controversies at that time when I was with the state government.  
1.We saw that the Bedthi project was shelved. That was the first problem I started with. 
2.There was a proposal for constructing a power plant in the silent valley forests in kerala.  Environmentalists opposed it . Most engineers supported the construction of a dam and power plant in the silent valley. Only a few opposed it. 
Fortunately, the ministry of environment took note of the silent valley problem and appointed a committee to look at the  different aspects and come up with recommendations. 
. The verdict was that it is a well preserved ecosystem and should be preserved and permission for the power plant should not be given . So the project was stopped. I was one of the supporters for scrapping this project. 


3.Similarly we handled another controversy in Karnataka. A company called jungle lodges wanted to set up a tourist resort in the kabini river area. Many felt that their project falls in the elephant corridor . The forest department also raised its objection. Even Mr Prabhakara , secretary in the commerce and industries ministry  raised his concerns  . It was discussed in many newspapers and magazines. But the  state government wanted to go ahead with this project. Mr Ullas Karanth , an environmentalist , who later became well known with his projects on tiger habitats , opposed the project of jungle lodges. His father and the famous jnanpith awardee, Mr Shivarama karanth  also opposed this project. He, RK Narayan and some others wrote to the prime minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi. She asked the state to take proper action. The state immediately got into action mode and canceled the permission given to jungle lodges. The company now runs  a unit on the banks of the Kabini river in a building with some tents outside. It won't disturb the movement of elephants. 

4. A major crisis started in Karnataka on giving primacy to kannada in education. A committee appointed by the previous government with Prof V K Gokak came up with a report to make kannada as a compulsory medium of instruction in Karnataka and also insisted that all students should go through kannada as a compulsory  subject in the schools  . The people wanted the government to implement the Gokak report . The agitation snowballed into a big one across the state and led to violence.  Many government cars were burnt. Even the car of the law secretary was burnt. My car narrowly escaped. We showed them the number plate and said we got the number plates written in kannada. Mobocracy ruled the state. Even Dr Rajkumar was mobbed and had to get into vidhana soudha for protection. 
Later, I went with Mr Shivarama karanth to a college in Siddhapur , near Sirsi. He said love for kannada should be shown in developing books on science in kannada. We can't be frogs in the well. 
This agitation was a major cause for dethroning the Congress government in Karnataka. 
I left the government in November 1982 and returned to IISc. Then elections were held. Ramakrishna Hegde became the chief minister. He brought the state under control in no time. 
Greetings
Dks
27/06/24, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 398
“I shall turn to the question of why it matters that we notice that there is such a category as meaningfulness, distinct from the categories of happiness and morality that we are more used to invoking in thinking about what to do and how to live. As I shall argue, awareness that meaning is a third sort of value a life can possess should affect our understanding of the first two sorts: that is, adopting models of human motivation and reason that are attentive to meaningfulness should affect the way we think about happiness and morality—and about self-interest as well.”

Susan Wolf

Prof Vasudev Parvati has the following comments. 
“Sir,  your post shows that people who were perceived as ruthless and cunning politicians by the lay public were actually great thinkers and workaholics! Certainly an eye opener!
Sir, please don't stop here, please do pen your thoughts on educational leaders, including maybe, some of the Directors and Vice Chancellors of prestigious institutions!”

My response 
This is a difficult question. I knew hundreds of principals, directors and vice chancellors.  Most were academically serious. That is a positive aspect. 
My problem is I was brought up by IISc.  So I had very high expectations. 
In IISc,  research is the primary focus. I didn't see it in all engineering colleges and even IITs during their first decade of operation. 
But, relevant to engineering programs in the country , we changed our curriculum every year. Since we had many faculty with degrees from abroad, we were familiar with the curriculum and activities in most famous western universities. Also , we got more than 50 plus academic visitors from the western university every year. So we were aware of the international scenario. So in mid sixties itself , I looked at MIT syllabus to prepare my course curriculum for computer techniques. Similarly in 1967, I took an electrical machines course with a lot of mathematical content and I introduced a power systems course with computer algorithms. I introduced many courses during 1967 to 1970 like optimization techniques,  computer simulation, computational methods, computing systems etc. Did  any institution in India give such a freedom to their junior most faculty? Did any institution built new courses despite some faculty going abroad for a graduate program? 
All engineering institutions in India were at a stagnant curriculum and didn't think of graduate programs or research. 
We ,at IISc, galloped with many new programs. We were leaders in most graduate programs. We had several new departments opened . 
So I look at institutions in India with this IISc mindset. So I am very critical in  my discussions. I needed to get adjusted . I did that. But I didn't come down a lot. So my discussions will be based on this background. But I will follow a neutral path.
Most faculty in colleges and even universities  had no freedom for curriculum development or even teaching. Or sometimes,  they don't want to use the freedom . 
Initially in the sixties and seventies, we saw most aided colleges doing well. They got good students. Teachers were sincere and knowledgeable.  They were selected for their capabilities and not recommendations. Managements had no role in running the college  . Their job ended with admitting students from their quota. Most won't pay for equipments and maintenance. So the principals were responsible not only for academics , but also for finance and accounts . Accounts are audited. DIrector of technical education had a strong  control  on administration,  faculty selection, principal selection and finances. University maintained academic standards and conducted exams.  So while the principals were constrained in their job, they focused on running the college. They didn't bother about development. They didn't plan for the future. They ran the traditional programs. Concentration and focus was on the undergraduate programs. That was the state in Karnataka. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
27/06/24, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 527

Let me now turn to your question on the accomplishment of the purpose of education. 
The purpose is never served when you finish school or university education. They seem to be ignored by formal education. Formal Education doesn't provide even discriminatory skills. So look outside this system.
First you don't get all these adjustment skills in schools and colleges. 
Second you learn social skills partially by actual online and real time - I mean by actual interactions with various kinds of people. You first learn it at home, with your peers, friends, then in the market, in the school, in various public places . I know a friend of mine. He was brought up in a reclusive and protected manner in his house. He didn't know how to go to market and buy things. When he joined IISc for ME, it was his first exposure to the outside world , though a protected one still. He wanted me to with him to buy essentials like bath soap , tooth paste, paper etc. He was literally hanging onto me for a year. By the second year, he gained confidence and conducted his social affairs independently. Still he didn't know anyone outside his class and his teachers. Even the teaching was strange to him. I have seen  many instances of such secluded and protected upbringing of children and their effects on the growth of their children . The first effect is fear of everything. The second is diffidence and loss of confidence. This happens despite their attending school and college education. So it is important for the parents to know their responsibility to bring up their children with all round social and interpersonal skills. They should own this responsibility and execute it fully. Allow for social interactions first. Don't scold a child not to talk to anyone. 
Once in a job, another level of learning happens - professionalism, etiquette,  ethics, sincerity  , punctual approaches etc. 
Once you become a leader, lots of learnings happen.
Third, children learn observation and discrimination - what to talk? How to react ,? What not to talk,? How to behave,? How to listen? etc. It is a crucial life long education. It doesn't stop some time. So purpose is a goal post. 
Lesson is to learn and adapt throughout your life. 
Have goals in life and achieve them. 
Being recluse or isolated is not a disaster. Try to avoid it. Social mingling is good. 
But keep away from evil. 
To conclude, education is a continuous process throughout one's life. 
Greetings 
Dks
28/06/24, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 399
And in our willingness to give that which we
seek, we keep the abundance of the universe circulating in our lives. This frail vessel thou emptiest again and again,  and fillest it ever with fresh life. This little flute of a reed thou hast carried over hills and dales, and hast breathed through it melodies eternally new. . . . Thy infinite gifts come to me only on those very small hands of mine. Ages pass, and still thou pourest,  and still there is room to fill. 
Rabindranath Tagore, Gitanjali

Let me continue my response to the request by Vasudev. 
I would categorize the principals according to the following levels. 
1.run a normal steady institution. No reforms , no innovations . - Most principals fall in this category. 
2. Manage the faculty and students  . Inculcate discipline , good teaching practices. - Many will fall in this category also. Some will miss it. 
3. Improve labs, attendance , performance of students , and increase ranking. Many will fall in this category also. 
4. Build a stable , academic and value based institution. I definitely remember a few names. Prof KA Krishnamurthy , MCE, Hassan . Prof MN Chennabasappa, SIT Tumkur , Prof Nityanandan and Prof Abhaykumar, TCE, Madurai, are some good examples. Both Prof Prahlada Rao of MSRIT and Prof Holla of RVCE brought their institutions to a stable state. 
5. Build an institution . There are many in this category. Prof Dhananjaya, JCE, Mysore, Prof Reddy ,SSIT, Tumkur , Prof Ramegowda, BIT  , and many others are in this category. 
6. Transform the institution. Prof Ashok Shettar comes to my mind. 
7. Build a research culture. Most failed in this . We needed to force this through TEQIP.  
8. Create new areas. Most accepted it after it evolved in other places. 
9. Transform the faculty. Most tried , but success is marginal. Most faculty stayed in their comfort zone. This, according to me, is a critical job of a principal. 
10. Take the institution to great heights. 
I know many principals who managed  their colleges well. But I can't list all of them here as I may miss many names. There are definitely many positives about most colleges principals like:
They did a good job with academics, with teaching schedules  , discipline, proper conduct of university exams, getting approvals from the university, DTE, AICTE etc, running the governing board, handling management and motivating students and faculty. They kept a good ranking and ran a good program. Autonomous colleges built a modern curriculum, took care in conducting exams, and evaluations . There were a lot of apprehensions about autonomy. Most senior academics and vice chancellors were not in favor of autonomy. Now colleges have fine a wonderful job for more than 20 years independently in autonomous mode. That is commendable. I feel happy about it. I played  fighting and guiding roles to bring autonomy into our colleges in Karnataka against opposition by vice chancellors. 
My general observations are :
1. Colleges that  had a principal with tenure ,  capability and responsibility had done well.  Tenure meant at least  three or more years of tenure as principal. 
2.Colleges where managements had a strong presence and control didn't do well.
3. Colleges with roll in roll out principals didn't do well.
4.Colleges with poor management died . 
5. Colleges with reforms oriented principals have grown well. 
6. Colleges with visionary management and principals went to very great heights  . 
We have enough examples of these . I don't want to name individuals or colleges. 
I don't have any great or even good opinion about vice chancellors.  They just existed. The only one who tried to improve an institution was NR Shetty  as VC of  Bangalore University.  
Hope this answers one query. Let me look at some directors next.
Greetings
Dks
29/06/24, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 400
“The source from which the world and the mind rise and into which they set is termed Reality, which does not rise nor does it subside.
—Ramana Maharishi

Let me continue with Vasudev’ s request.  
I had met many directors of IITs  . I knew about 8 directors of IISc. I knew several directors of IIM Bangalore.  I also saw directors of NITs at the transition point , when RECs were made NITs. 
I saw the evolution of IITs.  Initially IITs didn't know their strength. Even faculty selection was standard. Teaching was the primary job. The greatest strength of IITs is their students' capabilities. They got the top most students in the country. The second strength was their national character which permitted students to understand the different cultures of India and to appreciate the unity and diversity. It broadened their vision. Even today, IIT s strength is their BTech program. Research focus came pretty late. They are still catching up . 
To show the administrative and teaching focus of IITs,  let me start with my first visit to  IIT  Madras in 1964. It just started operations. My impression wasn't  great. But my exposure was minimal. The director was busy with the construction of buildings, definitely an urgent activity then.
 Let me discuss an encounter of mine in 1967. I was in Delhi and went to IIT looking for a faculty position. The culture I experienced was totally  different from IISc. I met the head of the EE department.  He is a famous person and became a director of an IIT later. During my interview  , as assistant professor came in and both the head and he discussed the number of transistors available and the number missing. I thought it a trivial matter not worthy of discussion at that level. That was my first shock. I was asked to meet the director and he was a famous person  , and was a principal of a famous Delhi College, an absolute zero on research.  He exhibited his college culture. It was June and pretty hot in Delhi.  So I had gone in a casual dress of a pair of trousers , a half sleeved slack shirt and chappals. He asked why I didn't wear a formal dress with shoes and tie. I said that it was IISc practice. I also told him that Delhi was very hot and so I thought this was an appropriate dress. I also told him that I didn't plan to get interviewed. Since I had a free day  I decided to explore the possibility of a job at IIT.  He was particular about tie and shoes and disapproved of me. Later I heard that he used to check on his faculty and saw to it that they go to their departments in the morning regularly in formal attire. See this focus. 
My visits  to IIT Bombay in 1969 and IIT  madras in 1969, 1970 and later on also confirmed my view that they were focusing on teaching. What I was very upset about was the fact that IIT Madras had a good number of faculty trained at IISc.  Fortunately IIT  Madras got a great director in 1969 in Prof A Ramachandran , again from IISc.  He changed the direction of IIT  madras and did his best to bring in a research culture  . That was transformational leadership. It worked.Later , he became secretary for the department of science and technology , government of India.  That was the mindset of the first set of directors. 
The initial vision was only building the institution. So they concentrated on the construction work and management like a college principal. Academics was left to the heads of departments. But due to the collaboration with Germany, UK ,and USSR, they got modern lab facilities. That was a plus point.
But IITs quickly moved into a goal of academic excellence.  IITs practiced best practices, provided freedom to faculty and students and used their autonomy effectively, thereby becoming top institutions in the country. Directors were responsible for this. The value systems and governance were and are good. 
But the great thing I like about IITs  is their sincere and hard effort to transform themselves into a research institution. It was slow and took a lot of time. IIT  Kharagpur had good research culture from the beginning. I am aware of several faculty of IIT Kharagpur in ECE - prof Das- and EE  - professors krishnamurthy, Keshavamurthy, and Menon - publishing papers in the sixties .  By the late sixties , most IITs got into graduate programs and research. 
IIT Kanpur  had a good start. It got many faculty who were researchers. Prof Kelkar , another IIScian, was a good director. He decentralized administration and focused on building lab facilities and research. They moved into modern areas of research . 
Let me discuss about IISc directors next.
Greetings
Dks
30/06/24, 5:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post401
There is a  comment from Prof  Arunkumar, RV University, on post 399:
“Very very objective observation. Thanks for these insightful comments. I am sure that the principals and management members shall introspect if they read through this analysis.”

My response 
Thanks. I agree with you. I gave a talk at a group of engineering colleges about the characteristics of a great institution and steps to build one  it was appreciated but not acted upon. We have an excuse mindset - “it can't be done. I don't have powers to do it, and  the university will object “ etc.

Let me return to the IISc directors. 
I had stronger and participative interactions with IISc directors . I had discussed my involvement with many directors before. The first one was Prof. Dhawan. I was fortunate that my first interaction as a student and young faculty was with him. He was an attentive director first. He listened to people and changed his decisions sometimes. He was a reformist director . His biggest contributions were in the domain of faculty development. He introduced the five year review and promotion scheme for faculty. It is a big reform. He identified and brought a good number of senior faculty from various US and Indian institutions.  Some names are Prof  ECG Sudharsan, Prof CNR Rao, Prof Modi, Prof GN Ramachandran, Prof G Narasimhan, Prof  V Krishnan, Prof KP Sinha, Prof LS Srinath, Prof Dutta, Prof Soundaranayagam , Prof Joshi . This action enriched the institute. Prof Dhawan created a great academic ambience at IISc.  He got the curricular reforms implemented. We tuned our admissions policy continuously. 
He was followed by Prof S Ramaseshan.  Ramaseshan created new centres. He planned for the supercomputer centre. He reformed the library and computer centre. 
Then came CNR Rao. He was fast , intuitive and correct. He also focused on improving the faculty culture. He focused on research. 
These three created a strong impression in me. 
That concludes my response to the query of Prof. Vasudev Parvati .
Greetings
Dks
01/07/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 402
“The ways by which you may get money almost without exception lead downward. To have done anything by which you earned money merely is to have been truly idle or worse. If the laborer gets no more than the wages which his employer pays him, he is cheated, he cheats himself. If you would get money as a writer or lecturer, you must be popular, which is to go down perpendicularly. Those services which the community will most readily pay for, it is most disagreeable to render. You are paid for being something less than a man.”
Thoreau 

There is another comment from N Ramanathan,  MD, Ponni sugars
“What ever is said of IITs must be equally valid for IIMs as well. No doubt research should be a top focus area, I think their interaction with industry is far too limited. A lot is talked but much less is happening on ground. The strength of a CA comes not just from a strong syllabus and tough exam but out of hands on experience, working in the corporate client office of the auditor. IIT and IIM students must spend at least one semester in top notch corporates in a tie up arrangement. Later this experiment must be expanded to other top notch colleges. In the end, as you have first observed, the top quality of input (student)  _ipso_ _facto_ ensures a quality output”

My response. 
I am unhappy at the manner at which IIM s are chasing money oriented actions  and focusing only on big businesses. I don't know why values are not given the prominent position. 
I was a visiting faculty at IIM Bangalore from 1985 to 1989. I taught computer systems there. I appreciated NS Ramaswamy,  the first director of IIM Bangalore.  He brought in many new areas like power  , transport, coal ,public sector etc. He recruited a number of research oriented faculty in economics, OR , finance. Many faculty were great.  I knew them personally and professionally.  But this differentiation between MBA faculty and non MBA faculty resulted in most leaving the institute. 
IIM s ignored research , ignored governance and even reality in India.  They concentrated on Harvard case studies. That total dependence was not acceptable. They moved towards business. But they didn't understand that businesses needed technology for survival. So they ignored technology and its adaptation to businesses. They didn't know about the disruptive innovation propounded by Prof Clayton Christensen,  Harvard business school. They didn't see the transformations happening. 
Initially IIM Ahmedabad had a mini HP computer and a few good math faculty taking care of it. But they also left after some years. 
I feel the neglect of technology on business and innovations due to technology on business is a grave error. Fintech was evolving . They didn't bother about it. I am worried how IIM s and even IIT s will respond to AI. 
But I should say there are many positives. Students are eager to learn. They want the final outcomes and don't worry about methodologies. They don't want to understand the internals ,but definitely want to know the externals. So they become successful managers. 
As regards your second point, internships are tried out by IIM s , IIT s and engineering colleges. Some institutions even provide foreign internships. It didn't provide the intended output unfortunately.  
Thanks again
Greetings
Dks
02/07/24, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 403
“The world seems more complex to Asians than to  Westerners, and understanding events always requires con-
sideration of a host of factors that operate in relation to one another in no simple, deterministic way. Formal logic  plays little role in problem solving. In fact, the person who  is too concerned with logic may be considered immature.
Human cognition is not everywhere 
the same. Without putting it in so many words, the humanities and social science scholars were making extremely 
important claims about the nature of thought. First, that  members of different cultures differ in their "metaphysics,"  or fundamental beliefs about the nature of the world. Second, that the characteristic thought processes of different  groups differ greatly. Third, that the thought processes are of a piece with beliefs about the nature of the world: Peo-
ple use the cognitive tools that seem to make sense—given the sense they make of the world.”

Richard Nisbett, in “ Geography of thought  “

D R Krishnan congratulated me for doing 400 posts without a break. It was a tough task to write more than a page everyday. The most difficult task was to decide on the contents for each day. Then remember the happenings. It wasn't easy. I am happy I passed your test. 
Thanks , Krishnan. 
Let me return back to my life at Bangalore from nov 1982 onwards. 
As I mentioned before, I decided suddenly on nov2, 1982 that I didn't like the government job. So I decided to return back to IISc full time. So I informed Mr Anagol and got relieved that day itself according to my wishes. Mr Anagol was very kind and understood my situation, predicament and temperament. My driver, Vijayakumar   ,  wept in the evening.  I forgot his name and remembered it only after writing this post. This retrieval process is amazing. It is random ,but the mind comes out with a spark suddenly. I was breaking my head about the name of the driver and it appeared after sometime when i wasn't thinking about it. My son was attached to him. Whenever we traveled, he used to be with my car driver . 
I rejoined the department . Prof Ramaseshan was happy. Many colleagues and friends were surprised that I returned. Prof R Kumar remarked that I left a good position with perks to write a few papers .
Prof SV Rangaswamy became the chair of the department.  Situation was good. The conflicting situations changed to a pleasant situation. I was busy with my teaching and research and lectures at PSTI and visits to TCS. I was also involved with KSCST. 
In the meantime , I got my first installment of the sanctioned loan from HDFC and started my house construction. I had ordered all the wooden fittings with Major Somasekhar, MSERA . I got bricks and cement. So we went ahead with foundation and curing. 
I shouldn't say I started my house construction. It was taken over by Mr Thimme Gowda . He took enormous interest. He fixed the mason, fixed the rates. He ordered granite slab and glass. We got sand from Yeshwantpur and ordered white mosaic tiles also from Yeshwantpur- Parijatha tiles. We visited the site everyday. Mr Thimme gowda had left the institute and joined the government as electrical inspector again on deputation from KEB.  
Since he lived closeby , we could visit the site everyday.  His help was immense. He took it as if he was constructing his own house. Major Somasekhar, who lived next to my site became a friend and was also helpful in several aspects of construction as he was a civil engineer.  
Work was progressing slowly and steadily. After about a year, we needed to cast the roof and got a gang to do the job of casting the concrete slab. Steel for the slab was prepared by the barbender.  I needed to stay in the site for a whole day to get the casting completed. It went off without a hitch. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
03/07/24, 5:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 404
“Change happens around us. It happens within us. If you live and breathe, change will be a big part of your daily life. 
Certain changes come about by choice; other changes, like a train wreck, result from situations out of our control. Consider financial woes, marital problems, testy teens, the heartbreak of a prodigal son or daughter, college stress-out, illness, loneliness, depression, or the loss of a loved one. 
These four gifts of change will help you learn how to respond rather than react to change with a new perspective:
1—Hope
2— Faith in God
3—Clear vision
4— Energy”
Jan Coates   “Attitudinize “

The last stage of house construction was chaotic. We needed to do carpentry work to fix all wooden units like cupboards, show case, doors and windows. I gave the electrical work to Mahantesh from CPRI , who helped me for decades. He did the complete electrification. Then came the mosaic laying, grinding and polishing people. They worked for about ten days. Then the plastering started. Then came painting and final plastering work. 
Now I needed to get both water and electricity connections from BWSSB and KEB. That was a big corruption hurdle. I may not want to pay , but the mason insisted on paying the people. But I had enough influence. The KEB guy said it will take a month. I knew Mr B G Rudrappa very well for several years. He was the chief engineer at that time. So I talked to him. He directed the AEE to give the connection immediately.  So within a day the assistant engineer materialized to give connection from the KEB pole to my incoming meter cum MCB board. He had brought an energy meter also. He was upset . I was present . He told me that it would take a few months to get a direct connection without an energy meter. Energy meters were in short supply. He said that I was lucky. The supply was needed for mosaic polishing work. So I avoided a delay of about six months in construction. 
The house was ready by the year end of 1983.
Similarly I was doing work on bangalore water supply . Dr Srinivas was working with me . He had been visiting all service stations to collect data for me. So he arranged a water connection for me. So that was done quickly without any fuss. 
Sankara subramanian continued his association with me. He was manufacturing the CPRI stove and selling it. He gave me the grills. We put it up on the terrace parapet wall. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
04/07/24, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 405
“PHILOSOPHICAL MODELS of human psychology—or, more specifically, of human motivation—tend to fall into one of two categories. Perhaps the oldest and most popular model conceives of human beings as egoists, moved and guided exclusively by what they take to be in their own self-interest. However, there have long been defenders of a dualistic model of motivation as well, according to which people are capable of being moved not only by self-interest, but also by something “higher.” Kant, for example, famously thought that in addition to being subject to inclinations, people are capable of being moved and directed by reason alone.”
Susan Wolf: Meaning of life.

Aparna Murthy commented on the Nisbett quote in post 403 that we are complex:
“I agree with your opening sentence. We as Indians especially are judgemental about things and further we don't want to change thinking that we are always right. Further talking about the past when it's not warranted is our way . Great job done by you Anna covering even miniscule details. Hats off to your memory 👏😃”

My short response
I don't like to typecast people . I think Hinduism is built on plurality . It accepts the fact that people have different behaviours, different ambience and different beliefs and hence provides multiple solutions to different kinds of our population. That is why it allows us to choose a path of dharma - jnana marga or pursuit of knowledge and reality, bhakti marga or devotion, karma marga or duty oriented living, and either  raja marga or ruling class 
Or yoga . Yoga is applicable to all. 
But Hinduism  has many foundational principles like sadachara, rtm - order ,harmony, giving and sharing, learning and teaching , other dos and don'ts - yamas and niyamas  etc which are applicable to all. But today there is no enforcement mechanism. 
That is the reason for many Siddhantas , many schools , many interpretations and many practices . So practices deviated widely from basic principles according to times. There are many divergent practices like atheism,  tantric systems  , vedic rituals, agamas and temple rituals, bhakti movements, guru cult , veerashaivism, shaktism, vaishnavism,  dvaita, smartha , kali worship , local gods worship etc. These also divided people into groups leading to quarrels and disagreements. 
In addition  cultural diversity , geographic diversity and political divides have added to the complexity of the people . 
I agree with you that we are complex and carry a burden. We have several attitudes of guilt, superiority, slavery, excuses etc. That is evident  today. 
Also there are no detailed and data oriented impartial studies on the behaviours of indians. The one who did great work was Prof MN Srinivas. But he looked at one aspect , did a lot of surveys and detailed analysis and excellent work. But I see a lot of highly biased subjective studies which are political statements of beliefs of individuals, not objective,  not scientific , not based on large samples. We are  divided by religion, caste, profession. Mostly, we are driven by ego - ahamkara- or slavery. But despite this complexity, most people worry about day to day survival for food and shelter. They are simpletons.  They follow the reverse of Thiruvalluvar's kural : they need to eat first before listening to philosophy or talks or opinions. 
The judgmental part comes from ego. Why do we criticize everyone and find faults with people? Why don't we accept people as they are? I feel our education system both formal school system and non formal - family and society have failed to inculcate a good value system in children. 
 To conclude , we don't have a unified population. We have diversity and unity. That is difficult to comprehend. The west refuses to accept it. West doesn't understand us. 
Another factor I want to add is the difference in views between west and India. West believes in discrete elements. Even an animal body consists of many discrete parts. Then they look at connections. They go bottom up - from parts to the whole. Indians go  top down - from whole to parts.  They believe that the universe is highly interconnected . Consciousness pervades everywhere.  They divide the humans into five sheaths.  Parts come later. That is the major difference between Indian and western philosophy. Indians accept unknowns. Swami Vivekananda even talked of unknowables. The West deals with only the known entities. It ignores unknowns.
Thanks.
Greetings
Dks
05/07/24, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 406
“Thirty years ago, travel agents made our airline and rail reservations, salesclerks helped us find what we were looking for in stores, and professional typists or secretaries helped busy people with their correspondence. Now we do most of those things ourselves. The information age has off-loaded a great deal of the work previously done by people we could call information specialists onto all of the rest of us. We are doing the jobs of ten different people while still trying to keep up with our lives, our children and parents, our friends, our careers, our hobbies, and our favorite TV shows. It’s no wonder that sometimes one memory gets confounded with another, leading us to show up in the right place but on the wrong day, or to forget something as simple as where we last put our glasses or the remote.”
Daniel Levitin    “organized mind” 

Let me return to my life in 1983. I was busy with my  house construction . Every morning I would leave home in the 11 th main  Malleswaram by 8.15 am and cross the railway line and walk to Subramanya Nagar to Mr Thimme Gowda’s house. We would go to the west of Chord road site and look at the construction, find out what needed to be done . Sometimes Major Somasekhar would join us and inspect the construction. His views were useful and helpful. Then I will go to the institute and Thimme Gowda to his office. This was a daily ritual for us. 
Then came another activity. IISc has a swimming pool. So we decided to teach both my children swimming. The pool opened  by 7am. So we - I and my children- left by 630 am and walked to the swimming pool. Some days we are lucky to find an auto . After swimming, we returned back home . I would quickly eat my breakfast and start my house construction ritual by walking to Thimme Gowda’s house. From our site , I will go to IISc. So it was a strenuous time . 
Let me discuss my activities at IISc.  
Since Mr Gowda was not there, I got another person to take care of the matters of power . But  I had some problems with power in the institute again . Two problems happened. 
One - institute's power demand was growing fast. We reached the maximum with our actual load exceeding our contract demand . Prof Ramaseshan was confident of the institute getting a super computer. So work on the construction of a building had started on that front. That meant  our maximum load would almost double according to the estimates. So there were frequent power shutdowns also. 
Two - KEB supply became erratic. The KEB station located in Gymkhana got overloaded due to its increased supply to not only the institute , but also to the porcelain factory, BWSSB jewel filters and neighbouring areas. It was planned as a KEB supply station only for the institute, but it spread its supply network wide. So disruptions were frequent. 
Hence , I started looking for alternate plans. I told Ramaseshan , our then director about it. He didn't bother about it. He felt strongly that we can't depend on KEB and we should go for  alternate DG units. Power situation stayed that way  till he retired from IISc. 
More in the next 
Greetings 
Dks
06/07/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 407
“We also do a remarkable thing that no other creatures seem able to do: whenever our usual ways to think fail, we can start to think about our thoughts themselves—and if this "reflective thinking" shows where we went wrong, that can help us to invent new and more powerful ways to think. However, we still know very little about how our brains manage to do such things. How does imagination work? What are the causes of consciousness? What are emotions, feelings, and thoughts? How do we manage to think at all? “
Marvin Minsky      “ Emotions machine”

KSCST normally had a fixed mindset of looking at mostly rural problems and renewable energy as an off shoot of ASTRA.  It decided  on a major  new project called Bangalore Urban studies - a new learning and understanding of the magnitude of the problems. That was a huge transformation in KSCST as well as Prof Reddy. He was drifting from rural focus and this is a good evidence of his and KSCST's turning point to accept the fact that there are many problems of urgency in a big city like Bangalore and they deserved our attention.  He moved from ASTRA to management. I recall S G Ramachandra saying that urban poverty is worse than rural poverty. GVK Rao talked about the grave fuel crisis in India. 
 This project was expected  to study the various resources and their sources and utilization.  It was a new experiment. It was hoped to provide many new understandings and learnings and lead to better designs of urban systems. The study involved many people from various institutions. Many areas like energy, water, transport  , vegetables, education, etc were covered. One major mistake with this project was the fact that it looked at these as discrete components. It didn't provide an integral view and mechanisms for governance and planning. I will discuss this more at the end of discussions on water.  I took up water supply and distribution in Bangalore city. This study lasted for more than three years. It was a great opportunity for us to know more about Bangalore and its history. I got an assistant to help me with my studies. Initially ,Dr Srinivas assisted me for more than a year. Later two of my students - Ashok Kattimani and Ramakrishna- joined me. They along with TV Ramachandra did a project with me during their BE studies at BMS college of engineering.  Later Ramachandra joined CES and continued there. He worked with me on regional energy planning.  
Dr Srinivas visited all water service units and collected statistics on water consumption by different types of consumers. He copied data from their registers. The engineers were very helpful. Later I found that the head quarters of BWSSB didn't have this kind of data. I passed on most of the collected information to the chairman. There were no pipe diagrams. 
The consumption studies revealed highly  unequal geographic distribution of water. There were also temporal  variations in the  consumption pattern. Initial analysis  showed that losses were high - of the order of 25 to 30 percent -  and infrastructure was not uniform and water pressure and storage varied considerably. 
Let us continue in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
07/07/24, 4:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 408
“if this ability to truly see others is important in making the marriage decision or in hiring and retaining workers, it is also important if you are a teacher leading students, a doctor examining patients, a host anticipating the needs of a guest, a friend spending time
with a friend, a parent raising a child, a spouse watching the one you love crawl into bed at the end of the day. Life goes a lot better if you can see things from other people’s points of view, as well as your own. “Artificial intelligence is going to do many things for us in the decades ahead, and replace humans at many tasks, but one thing it will never be able to do is to create person-to-person connections. If you want to thrive in the age of AI, you better become exceptionally good at connecting with others.”
David Brooks 

Let me look at some basic flaws in our utilities ,which exist  even now. 
1.While major works like reservoirs , pump houses, generating stations are planned well, distribution networks are done in an ad hoc manner. This is true of water, power, roads, bus transport and even Fibre optic lines. 
2. While the transmission systems are provided with sufficient funds, the city networks for distribution gets a low priority and low allocation of costs. Normally ,for optimal design, cost ratios between transmission and distribution should be equal. But in India   it was 70 for transmission and 30 for distribution. 
3. Operation and maintenance are also handled in an ad hoc manner. 
4. While automated technologies were and are available , our utilities don't use them. It is the case even now even in bangalore. You will see an automated power substation in many offices in Bangalore, but  the BESCOM substations are in the old manual state without any automation.
5. Distribution as applied to utilities is not taught in our engineering curriculum. 

Similarly  , While BWSSB did a great job of planning, designing and implementing the scheme  of bringing water from cauvery to the city in several stages over several decades, and building a good pumping station and several reservoirs , it didn't do similar planning ,design and maintenance activities for the internal distribution. This was the same problem we encountered in the electricity boards. While they took a lot of effort to plan the generation and transmission systems  , they ignored city distribution. I had discussed how I redid Delhi electricity distribution.  It was bad, and skewed and created difficulties for people . Same is the case with water distribution. 
I developed a model for an urban water distribution , and several solution algorithms. Kshirasagar , my student, worked with me on urban water supply and distribution system planning and operations. That was in 1973. But I didn't see BWSSB doing this activity of even studying the water distribution patterns - pressures and flows. 

The design of the city's distribution network didn't feature intermediate pumping points particularly in elevated places  . Water was flowing based on gravity flow ,pumped from the ground level reservoirs.  So people living at a higher ground level suffered. I was one of the sufferers . My house in 13th cross, 11th main was at the highest point in 11th main, going down on both sides. So we got much less quantity of water compared to others. The valves were operated manually. Sometimes , the ground floor in my building will get water, but we in the first floor won't get it. The valve operating mechanic was clever. He won't open it fully. So we were at his mercy. 
Let us look at the water supply to the city next. 
Greetings
Dks
08/07/24, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 409
“How many times have you heard someone say
If I had his money I'd do things my way
Hmm, but little they know
Hmm, it's so hard to find
One rich man in ten with a satisfied mind.

Hmm, once I was wading in fortune and fame
Everything that I dreamed of to get a start in life's game
But suddenly it happened
Hmm, I lost every dime
But I'm richer by far with a satisfied mind.”
Bob Dylan

Let me look at our water sources. Bangalore till the beginning of 20th century depended on rain water stored in lakes in and around the city. Even in the 18th century , people suffered from water shortage. There was a circular issued by the British government asking people not to use the water for gardening. Also there was a record of draining a lake once because of contamination with sewage.   
Initially it was lakes in the city like Dharmambudhi and Kempambudhi that supplied water to the city. Then major lakes in the neighborhood like Hesaraghatta reservoir were used to supply water to the city. 
Both the two big lakes inside the city were converted - one into kanteerava stadium and another into the majestic area main  bus stands for both city services and state services . There were about 200 lakes in the city and outskirts. Mathikere and Sankey were huge lakes near us. All these were systematically destroyed mostly by the state government and land sharks.  Even the Forest  department occupied a part of Sankey tank. This was a simple process. First block the inlet drainage lines  and raja kaluve. The water inflow to lakes came down. Then sewerage was allowed into the lakes. Public will object and agitate. So close all inlets. Lake chokes to death. Water hyacinth was another menace.
We need to remember that Bangalore was not a single city. It consisted of a city municipality governed under the Mysore government of the Wodeyars. It consisted of Chamrajpet , and Basavana gudi. The second component of the city was the cantonment area under the British army's control. The third was the civilian areas in the east like Ulsoor which were under the control of the collector of Madras district  . IISc was also part of that section  . In addition , there were many villages which are now part of the city. The city gobbled hundreds of villages to expand itself. So designing and operating a water supply unit was complicated. Also You needed approval from three different entities for any additional work and the costs needed to be shared between the Mysore government and the British government.  It needed negotiations and arms twisting tactics by the British  who had the upper hand. 
Bangalore city got its piped water supply in 1896 for the first time. The first pumping station was built in a village called Soldevanahalli. This station supplied water even during the 1980s to the neighboring areas. When we first got water consumption data, we were not aware of this SD Halli pumping and water service station. Deep search got us  this information. This was untreated water. This pump house was located on the Arkavathi  River  Arkavathi river starts at Nandi hills flows on the northern part of Bangalore and joins cauvery. It is a rain fed river. Then came the water pumping from the Hesaraghatta reservoir. In both cases , the water head was not high. So pumps needed lower power. 
Let us continue in the next post the story of water supply to the city. 
Greetings 
Dks
09/07/24, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 410
“Why are Westerners more likely to apply 
formal logic when reasoning about everyday 
events, and why does their insistence on logic  sometimes cause them to make errors? Why are  Easterners so willing to entertain apparently contradictory propositions and how can this some-
times be helpful in getting at the truth?” 
Nesbitt   “ Geography of thought”

In the early part of the 20th century , Bangalore saw a big growth in population. Bangalore was growing faster. So water consumption was growing. The lakes couldn't meet the demands despite augmenting hessaraghatta storage capacity. The reservoir is called Chamarajendra reservoir.  
So there were discussions to get water from other sources. Sir MV didn't expect Bangalore to grow. He felt Bangalore was not suitable for industries. Still , he chaired a committee to decide on a source of water for bangalore  Arkavathi river  was nearby and so it was decided to store the water and bring it to Bangalore. A dam was built in Thippegundanahalli to store Arkavathi water . So it was constructed in 1933.  Water was brought to Malleswaram and treated at jewel filters. These exist even now and are in use. That  dam breached in 1936 . The engineers wanted to drain the water from the reservoir and repair the breach. Sir MV didn't like wasting the water.  He opposed draining the reservoir . He repaired the breach by putting a big pressure chamber near the breach point. The reservoir became fine and is still in good shape . This was the first major source. It could meet our water requirements till the late fifties. It was a very wise decision and the water from Arkavathi is still coming to Malleswaram , but the quantum is reducing. 

The south and west of bangalore grew faster than east and north . Both Rajajinagar in the west and jayanagar in the south became huge and very large extensions and suffered from severe water shortages. So in 1958, the government looked at many options. A momentous decision was taken that river cauvery is the right source to supply water to Bangalore.  This saved the city. 
Initially the Thippengundanahalli reservoir was augmented . It was proposed to get 140 mld of water from cauvery - equal to Arkavathi supply. 
More in next. 
Greetings
Dks
10/07/24, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  411
“Are people good intuitive statisticians? We already knew that people are good intuitive grammarians: at age four a child effortlessly conforms to the rules of grammar as she speaks, although she has no idea that such rules exist. Do people have a similar intuitive feel for the basic principles of statistics? Amos reported that the answer was a qualified yes. We had a lively debate in the seminar and ultimately concluded that a qualified no was a better answer.”
Amos Tversky 

The major problem was that Bangalore  is more than 400 meters above the level of cauvery river. So a massive quantity of water has to be pushed up to a height of more than 1000 and this required a lot of electrical  energy .   It was decided to pump water over 600 meters to Thorekadanahalli. This was done in stages.  It was a totally new project  . There was a need for electric energy of about 100 MW then. 
 Fortunately Karnataka constructed the massive 1000 MW capacity Sharavathi valley hydroelectric project. So it became  a big energy surplus state then and didn't know how to sell this surplus energy. So it invited Indalco to set up an aluminum plant at Belgaum. It subsidized energy at 5 paise per unit to industries then whereas it was about 30 paise per unit for domestic users. Karnataka had a separate generation company distinct from KEB . KEB was handling only transmission and distribution.  This division was historic starting from the shivasamudram project . 
I had visited the power generation company called hydro electric power corporation in the late sixties - it later became KPC - to discuss the sharavathi project. I remember my visit - the plaster from the roof fell down and there was a commotion. Later , I attended a meeting in the late sixties or early seventies in vidhana soudha convened by GVK Rao, then chief secretary. The purpose was to come up with a selling price for energy to be supplied to Tamilnadu. Karnataka wanted 4.5 paise per unit whereas Tamilnadu was prepared to pay 4 paise per unit only   . Karnataka said ,”we are forced to give you reactive power free.” Discussion was inconclusive. It was a desperate situation. 
Since energy was available , it was easily supplied to the huge pumping station at TK Halli. The first stage ,after delays  ,  brought cauvery water to the south end circle in the early 1970s. It brought a big relief to houses in the southern parts of the city like Jayanagar. The interconnection of pipe network between the Arkavathi supply and cauvery supply happened later. 
From that day, cauvery became the life-giver to Bangalore,  and started supplying more and more water. The government implemented several stages of this cauvery scheme over many decades  drawing very large quantities of water from cauvery to Bangalore. 
Still there has been a gap between supply and demand, demand always higher than supply. In one sense , it is very good. It made people conscious of their needs and availability and thereby reduced their consumption. Our average daily water consumption was less than the WHO standards. This was only a forced conservation of water. Water was wasted in doing many tasks. It is a separate topic .
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
11/07/24, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 412
“our own intuitions were deficient. In spite of years of teaching and using statistics, we had not developed an intuitive sense of the reliability of statistical results observed in small samples. Our subjective judgments were biased: we were far too willing to believe research findings based on inadequate evidence and prone to collect too few observations in our own research. 
Amos Tversky and Daniel kahneman in
“Thinking fast and slow”

I recall the delays in implementing the various construction activities particularly in the second stage of cauvery water supply project.  
This happened when I was in the karnataka government. After delays of a few  years, a target was set to complete the works by 1983. We found that most ground level reservoirs were not ready and even pipelines were only completed partially. We recommended that Mr Gulam Mohammad be transferred to BWSSB to execute the works faster. He was very efficient in getting work done faster. Delays are due to financial issues with contractors and man power management . Inspections weren't planned at regular intervals. Firefighting was the accepted norm. But happily, he worked in a mission mode and completed more than 80% of the work and brought more water from Cauvery to Bangalore.  

 Today we are drawing 1450 MLD of water from cauvery . The city draws an estimated 750 MLD from groundwater today.  Still it is 30% less than the demand. We live in scarcity. But pilferage is estimated at 30 % and wastage may be another 10 to 15%
I will discuss consumption later.
Our policy and approach to the water supply problem considered only the supply side - keep on increasing supplies in order to match the demand. It didn't look at the demand minimization.  

The entire water planning was totally based on increasing the supply to meet the increasing demands. Unfortunately, we always try to increase supplies without looking at utilization.  
When we say people use water, only a small part is consumed and the remainder is let  off as waste water - both sullage  and sewage.  At that time - in the eighties, there was no effort to look at a proper treatment of waste water as an important source.  A very modern bio digester based treatment plant was put up in K and C valley , designed by Prof SC Pillai from our biochemistry department. But in 1970,   when we visited the plant it wasn't working properly. The partially treated water was let off for use in irrigation. The Vrishabhavathi Valley let off partially treated water for irrigation. So I felt we should use this water for industrial purposes. I did a case study in the Whitefield area. We found the treating and recycling used water is a cheaper and sustainable option. 
We also did a study on water wastage in washing cars . Even the dairy was using 8 litres of water per litre of milk production mainly for washing purposes. So there are many ways of reducing water consumption.  


We also did a cost analysis . We found that about 50  percent of revenue went for power charges. So this gave a strong financial motive for water conservation and recycling. We will save electrical energy also. 

The domestic water supply was subsidized. Any increase in tariff led to objections and agitations and newspaper condemnations. Design didn't take into account the variations in land levels in many places. Public fountains- a term used by BWSSB to refer to public taps -  were surveyed and we found that they were not working , water was not available in most of the fountains. and the environment near public fountains was unhealthy. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
12/07/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 413
“The pace of innovation at the energy-climate nexus is accelerating; however, educational priorities have not effectively evolved to prepare students for the rapidly changing energy-climate landscape. Change is occurring with advances in distributed energy resources including innovations in renewable energy and new approaches to managing electricity demand, which are linked to growing awareness of the climate change risks of fossil fuel-reliant energy systems .” (Brown 2015; Princen  2015).

The quotes in the  past two posts deal with intuition. Mr Srinivasan PNB promptly commented on this and also talked to me. His comments are
“Good morning sir.  It's a good question to start with statistics.  That's why perhaps we are more anecdotal and not  analytical in our approach. Namaste 🙏”


Let us elaborate the context particularly with Nisbett's comments on the differences between east and west.
First ,let us ask -what is intuition?
Intuition is the feeling or understanding that makes you believe or know that something is true without being able to explain why. 
It is instant understanding without reasoning.  
According to Steve Jobs,  Indians are highly intuitive. Many have proved that humans are not rational. 
But western philosophy is based on logic, reason and has no place for intuition. The only place where West accepts intuition is the process of language learning. Since a child speaks in a language without formal introduction to Grammar and structures  , they consider it intuitive. 
But I believe anything obtained through training is not intuitive. Statistics is not natural ,it is an acquired skill. So we can't expect to have intuitive knowledge of statistics. Particularly projections are subject to manipulation. 
I believe there is a native , inherited intuition and a derived intuition. 
How do we get the derived intuition?
We mostly follow others. You see a successful businessman. You feel you can be successful and so follow him and get into business. He may succeed and you may fail. The best example is startups chasing unicorn status. Most startups fail. Their intuitive understanding is wrong and so their business fails.
 Children see bus drivers and want to become a driver, see a doctor and want to become a doctor  . Then at school , they see a good teacher, most try to emulate the teacher and play like a teacher. This becomes a habit. We have aspirations and find people successful in a job or task, we want to follow them. Is this blind belief and actions based on that good?
Children may  grow out of childhood fantasies ,but adults don't.  We act mostly based on our poor / partial understanding of others. When you see a successful businessman  , you don't see hundreds of failed businesses. So intuition may lead us astray in a wrong path. 
But intuition gives us alternate paths   and if your have developed correct intuition, you will get many paths. Then use reason to select a right , acceptable path. 
Intuition is known as part of hot cognition .
The hot system is the cognitive function that is automatic, spontaneous, fast, effortless, and mostly unconscious, and it is the primary driver of emotions. In the hot cognitive process there is no sense of voluntary control.
We are born with innate skills that we share with other animals. We are prepared to perceive the world around us. Our fear of snakes and spiders and our ability to differentiate between objects, orient our attention, and avoid losses are innate skills that help us to naturally stay safe.
Built upon innate skills is the hot function of learned association between ideas. Learned associations help glue the fabric of ideas and concepts into a common language. For example, we all agree that the capital of Japan is Tokyo. Thus we associate the specific name with the place and know that when we talk about Tokyo, we are all speaking of the same location. Society, culture, and religion depend on learned associations to function. Without them it would be difficult to communicate and understand each other properly. Hot cognition may be derived  intuition. 
Intuition is like a sword . Use it wisely. Many become visionaries due to the correct interpretation of their intuitive knowledge . 
Greetings
Dks
13/07/24, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 415
Let me return to 1983 to look at my other activities. 
My house construction was mostly completed by mid 1983 except for floor polishing , plastering and electrical and water fittings plus getting approvals . We decided to conduct the grihapravesam ceremony. I didn't print an invitation , but typed it along with a map of the location. I   invited most of my colleagues in the department and a few others. I organized puja by our regular vadhyar. We got a cow to go into the house. We got a new caterer to provide lunch to about 100 people. It wasn't easy. But the caterer managed the lunch well. My parents were present. Most of the visitors liked the house. My cousin DR Sundaram who had shifted to Bangalore  also attended the lunch. So it went off well.  My father left after lunch. I didn't know at that time  that was to be his last visit to my house and Bangalore. He passed away the next year. 
Lots of things happened during the period 1983-1984  - both good and bad. 
My children wanted a TV. So at last  we bought an Eiko color TV. It was with us for about a decade. 
It was also an important period. Nirmal Jain got married in bangalore.  Mukul Jain , Nirmal's relative, came to Bangalore around that time. We became very good friends. We are still in touch with each other. I also met Nirmal's brother in law and Mukul's father in law at that time. It was a life long association with those families. I cherish my friendship with them . 
I became the chair of the Bangalore chapter of the computer society of India. 
As I said earlier the housing situation in bangalore was getting worse. After the protest by faculty, institute started two sets of quarters D with two bedrooms and E with three bedrooms. It was ready for occupation. So by late 1984, I became eligible for an allotment of a quarter in the campus. I moved into IISc in December 1984.
Greetings 
Dks
14/07/24, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 414
An explanatory note from me:
I wanted to conclude my water story and wrote post 414. I should have  posted 414 yesterday , but posted 415 instead. Why?
This morning as is my usual practice, I was copying post 414 already prepared by me , but suddenly the whole post vanished , not copied. I couldn't locate it. So I posted 415 . I rewrote 414 again . I am posting it now. 

"The question, 'Can machines think?' I believe to be too meaningless to deserve discussion. Nevertheless I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general, educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted." Alan Turing

We saw bangalore getting its needs for water mostly from two rivers - Arkavathi nearby which is a rain fed river its catchment being Nandi hills  and the big Cauvery about 100 kms away from the city. Over the years , the city depended mostly on Cauvery only. 
We saw that the city generates  about 70% of supplied water as waste water. The waste water is treated in two valleys then in 1982 . But the water was not recycled back into the city , but was used for irrigation in downstream villages. So we suggested that this should be treated properly and reused. People use only less than 10% of their supplied water for potable purposes like drinking and cooking and use the remaining 70% for non potable purposes like washing vessels, floor , car and clothes and for bathing and  toilet usage. So we felt the treated water can be used for non potable uses. It can become a major source , reducing the dependence on Cauvery river. 
There is a third source. Traditionally the city used rain water for its use. Rain water was stored in hundreds of lakes across and outside the city . Some of  these lakes were also networked. Rain water collection from the city area and from its large outer periphery extending to about 50kms was done by a great network of drainage canals . There were small canals in the streets , followed by bigger canals and further draining into large / huge canals called raja kaluve which drained the water into the lakes . It was an excellent system executed by the Maharaja of Mysore , Sri Nalavadi Krishnaraja wodeyar in the beginning of the 20th century. 
Unfortunately, this system has been destroyed. Most canals were blocked such that Rain water didn't go to the lake as planned. That made the lakes dry. So the lake was encroached and buildings came up . Even raja kaluve had also been encroached. This was due to poor maintenance. 
Bangalore gets rainfall that can meet about 25% of its water requirements. So we suggested to go for distributed Rain water harvesting. This will reduce the demand on cauvery and also reduce electrical power and energy requirements. This will also reduce the flooding in our roads during rains  . We wanted an innovative ,distributed rain water harvesting scheme to be designed and implemented. But unfortunately it was not taken up by BWSSB. 
On the usage side, water conservation measures had to be identified and implemented. Many pipes were leaking. They had to be replaced. These simple measures like leakage detection and correction can reduce consumption by easily 10%. 
I also proposed a computerised data collection, alerts and management architecture. The twenty-first century saw a new area - cyber physical systems emerging. But I proposed it in 1982 itself. 
I wrote a monograph on our work on Bangalore's water supply and distribution system. It became a part of the four volumes books on Bangalore urban ecosystems studies brought out by KSCST. 
This concludes my discussions on water supply project undertaken by me for about four years.
Greetings 
Dks
15/07/24, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 416
“Most of the time we live in an interior world of dreams, desires, and obsessive thoughts. But in this period of exceptional creativity, we are impelled by the need to get something done that has a practical effect. We force ourselves to step outside our inner chamber of habitual thoughts and connect to the world, to other people, to reality. Instead of flitting here and there in a state of perpetual distraction, our minds focus and penetrate to the core of something real. At these moments, it is as if our minds—turned outward—are now flooded with light from the world around us, and suddenly exposed to new details and ideas, we become more inspired and creative.”
Robert Greene in   “Mastery”

I missed a few activities in the 1983 period. My daughter reminded me about it. 
Madhav Gadgil prepared a proposal for setting up the centre of ecological sciences . I was another  signatory to the proposal. It was sent to the ministry of environment , government of India. The ministry agreed to fund it and support it . So in 1983 , the centre was set up and I associated myself with the centre. The first job we did was recruiting people. An extension centre was set up in Sirsi and many projects were focussed on the Uttara kannada district. 
I visited Sirsi several times. I also initiated a project on energy surveys similar to our ASTRA survey. 
As already stated , the Gokak agitation was the talk of the state. During one of my visits, Mr Shivarama karanth also came to Sirsi . He was invited to address the students in a college in Siddapur. Madhav requested me to accompany him. I did that. As expected the students asked about the agitation to implement  the Gokak report . He said that we don't have books in Kannada for various topics of mathematics and  science . If we decide to shift to kannada medium, we will go backward and become frogs in the well. After his talk, we were taken to the library . The librarian wanted to show the book collections , but Mr Karanth said ,” I don't want to see a dead library. I want to see a living library. Show me your issues register.” Nothing was shown  . We had lunch in Mr Ganesh Hegde’s house.  He was Ramakrishna Hegde's cousin. Prof SV Bhat , IISc physics department,  was his son in law. Then we returned to Sirsi. 
 I was active with most of the CES activities in addition to our departmental academic programs and I was also handling the hybrid computer lab , which continued to be a central facility .  
I became active with NSS . Mr Bhide was in charge of Karnataka and he invited me to several small cities. I visited and lectured in Bijapur, Dharwad, Gulbarga , Belgaum , KD Gudi  , Adichunchanagiri,  and many other places for NSS camps organised by the universities in karnataka like Bangalore,  Mysore, Karnatak, and Gulbarga and PUC board . It became hectic. 
At that time, there were many environment and forests related activities going on across India . We discussed the Silent Valley project. Similarly in the Himalayas two leaders started a chipko movement. It encouraged women to hug trees when the development project leaders came to cut the trees  . The names of two important people are Sundarlal Bahuguna and Chandi Prasad Bhat . Sundarlal came to Bangalore. Doordarshan wanted him to be interviewed by Prof Madhav Gadgil. Gadgil suggested my name. So they approached me. I agreed to the interview.  It was held in Cubbon Park  to have a green ambience appropriate for the topic of discussion. Mr Bahuguna answered the questions nicely . This was my first TV appearance.  Later I appeared in many panel discussions.  I also produced two documentaries - one on ecology and another on water. 
Greetings 
Dks
16/07/24, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 417

“The confirmation bias is the mother of all misconceptions. It is the tendency to interpret new information so that it becomes compatible with our existing theories, beliefs, and convictions. In other words, we filter out any new information that contradicts our existing views (“disconfirming evidence”). This is a dangerous practice. “Facts do not cease to exist because they are ignored,” said writer Aldous Huxley. However, we do exactly that, as super-investor Warren Buffett knows: “What the human being is best at doing is interpreting all new information so that their prior conclusions remain intact.”

Rolf Dobelli   “The art of thinking clearly.”

Let me continue with our movement to IISc quarters. We were allotted E20. It was upstairs in a block of 4 flats - 2 in the ground floor and two in the first floor. Prof GPadmanabhan was our neighbour. These quarters were far inside the campus after the academic area. We needed to go to Malleswaram to shop . That was difficult  . There was an amenities block with a few shops. We got vegetables there. 
But life was heavenly. Children had lots of advantages. We can leave them alone in the house because of the secure environment.  There are many facilities in the campus  - play areas, lots of open space, swimming pool, movies in gymkhana , books borrowed from our faculty club or library, etc. They didn't depend on transport to go to school  . They walked  to the school. So they were independent. They had friends to visit and play. They loved the house and the ambience. They enjoyed iisc stay. It played an important role in mounding them with  good habits like reading general books, good communications , and interpersonal skills . They became independent and became responsible, but had no religious or spiritual exposures. We visited several places. 
 
We settled down quickly. We knew most of our neighbors as they were all IISc professors/ faculty.  Our life became tension free. 
I was busy with the departmental work. We started two ME programs  -one , computer science and engineering and another systems science and automation, a joint  multidisciplinary program with the EE department.  I attended a meeting to change the name of our department . We got approval from all for the new  name computer science and automation. We were no longer known as the school of automation. From then on we became CSA . We retained automation in the name. 

I chaired another committee to introduce a BE computer science program. We successfully started the BE program. 
I got active with both the computer society of India and the institution of engineers. We became the state with the largest number of student chapters. We were entrusted with the responsibility of organising an international conference titled “ CAD , CAM, CAE for industrial progress “ under the auspices of IFIP, an international federation . I became the organising chair and Prof  Rajaraman became the program chair. It was a great opportunity. It needed extensive preparation. We formed two committees. The conference was scheduled in June 1985. 
We employed two girls to take care of the secretarial work  . We fixed the newly opened Taj Residency as the venue as it had a large hall with seating capacity of 500 people. 
More on this in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
17/07/24, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 418
“Having read all the shastras and well grounded in them, they grow conceited that they are all knowing, accomplished and worthy of respect; filled with love and hate they presume themselves respectable; they are only packasses esteemed for carrying heavy loads over long distances in difficult and tortuous ways.”
Adi Shankaracharya, Advaita Bodha Dipika.


Mr Gurumurthy appreciates Rolf's quotes yesterday:
“Rolf Dobelli's thoughts you have quoted above is another gem. 🙏🏼”
Let me continue with my explanation about our preparations for the conference.
We decided on Taj Residency as the venue, had discussions with Taj people and finalized the rates. Next we decided on the call for papers and it was printed and sent to all institutions. 
We decided the schedule for the conference  and wanted four invited talks. We got some names and wrote to those speakers. One speaker was Indian and others were foreigners. Unfortunately the Air India's kanishka aircraft which left Canada crashed at that time. So the Indian speaker ,whobwas identified by us and was in the US,  canceled his visit and told us that he won't come and speak in the conference. His father in India was worried and told his son not to visit india at that time . Actually, I lost a friend in that air crash or bombing - prof Sinha from IIT Delhi whom I met in UMIST ,   Manchester during my visit in 1974. 
Then we sent the announcement - call for participation and registration - it was also mailed to most institutions and industries, another major. We decided to hold an exhibition of products and sent requests. 
We finalized the registration kit - no plastic bag , but a good thick cotton shoulder bag with a zipper to close it, with writing materials. Event management concept was just being experimented by an advertising agency and they approached me  . We agreed to give the work to them. They started work on publicity and the registration kit. We got a special four page supplement published in some daily newspapers. 
Response to our participation requests was good and we got  500 participants easily. Most industries sent names of engineers. We responded to all. 
While all these were happening , I had a problem at my home front. My father was diagnosed with angina. He was admitted to a hospital - I think Isabella hospital - in Madras. I went to Madras. When he was not well in April, I went to Madras to see him. I was planning to return on a Sunday. He was enquiring about our accommodation - our quarters at iisc- . He said he can't stay in Madras and wanted to shift to Bangalore. 
But by the evening on that day of my departure , he fell sick. Before I could bring a taxi to take him to the hospital, he passed away. It was sudden. That was a shock. It was Ramanavami day. 
My uncle Dr Ramakrishnan came unexpectedly that night and stayed with us. We cremated him the next day. My other uncle from Tirunelveli came and stayed with us till the ceremonies were over. We did the ceremonies in Chennai . So I stayed there. 
I returned after the completion of the thirteen day ceremonies and continued with my activities. 
We conducted our work on the conference scheduled to be held  in June 1984. It went off well. That was a relief. There were minor hiccups in getting the registration kits. So that was a great experience of organising a major international conference. We got more than 20 sponsorships from industries and IITs. So we had a surplus budget. 
We got the accounts audited and returned the surplus money to CSI headquarters.  
Greetings.
Dks
18/07/24, 4:27 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 419 
“Motivation 1 for living 
Initially. the assumption about human behavior was a simple one that  We were trying to survive.
Motivation 2 for living 
to seek reward and avoid punishment more broadly.  The engine of commerce has been fueled equally by carrots and sticks.
Motivation 2 has endured for a very long time. Indeed, it is so deeply embedded in our lives that most of us scarcely recognize that it exists.
Motivation 2.0 still wasn’t exactly ennobling. It suggested that, in the end, human beings aren’t much different from horses—that the way to get us moving in the right direction is by dangling a crunchier carrot or wielding a sharper stick.
Motivation 2 has become far less compatible with, and at times downright antagonistic to: how we organize what we do; how we think about what we do; and how we do what we do.”
Extracted from Daniel Pink's book  “ Drive”

Let me discuss about  a few friends acquired by me during this period. 
Before I became the chair of CSI Bangalore, H S Nagaraja was the chair. We are close friends and are in contact now also. He was the one who started the computer activity in Kirloskar Electric Ltd and he worked in the research department with Dr Jayaram, who was also a friend of mine. Kirloskar moved into the computer industry later and unsuccessfully tried to manufacture computers and later started data services . It didn't do well and was wound up. Nagaraja left kirloskar and helped me in many of my activities. He joined Bangalore University when I was helping them to computerize their examination system. Then he joined ISEC when I was strengthening their computer systems. Then he joined KSCST under the NRDMS program and worked with me to produce a book. Later he moved onto Sir MV institute of technology. We have many years of association. He also tried to help me in our foundation - FAER - when it was set up in 2005. Thank you Nagaraja.
Another important person whose acquaintance I had during this period was Mr S D Jain, father of Rashmi Jain and brother in law of Nirmal Jain. He continued our friendship till his last days. He lived in Delhi. But he had a great value system that I admired a lot . He worked in PWD , but was scrupulously honest, straight forward and highly quality conscious, a very rare person. He was also a strict follower of the principles of ahimsa expounded by jainism. He used to eat dinner before sunset. He was very particular about it. I arranged a cook for them. Unfortunately ,the cook was employed in the EE department at IISc and so he reached Jain s house only by 5: 45 pm. He had to cook fast so that Mr Jain could eat before sunset. He also discussed his son's engineering education with me. He admitted him to BIT. I talked to Dr Rame Gowda , chairman of BIT. We later attended his son's wedding also. The entire Jains have been  great family friends of ours for several decades. 
My association with the students projects program of KSCST brought me in association with many principals and many faculty in more than 30 engineering colleges. It also gave me a view and picture of reality of education in the state. It was my first awareness.  I won't be able to mention the names of all I knew and know. Let me recall a few with whom I had several interactions. 
One of them was Prof Dharmananda Rao, principal of MCE , Hassan and later JNNCE Shimoga. I had helped him with faculty selections at both colleges. I used to visit both colleges regularly for lectures also. I also advised and helped in the purchase of  computers for JNNCE. Let me discuss my involvement with MCE in detail later. 
I knew  Prof KA Krishna murthy of MCE for several decades in various positions, the last being as Principal of SSIT Tumkur. He is one of the few serious academic with interest in good research work I met in an engineering college. He was well read and wrote text books also. He did several reforms in MCE.
I will discuss my association with them in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
19/07/24, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 420
How you do it - for money or satisfaction?
Open source is a great movement . It is not for  money people developed open sources . Many open source like Unix, Linux, Firefox, Wikipedia, cloud stack,   etc were great successes. 
“MIT management professor Karim Lakhani and Boston Consulting Group consultant Bob Wolf surveyed 684 open-source developers, mostly in North America and Europe, about why they participated in these projects. Lakhani and Wolf uncovered a range of motives, but they found “that enjoyment-based intrinsic motivation, namely how creative a person feels when working on the project, is the strongest and most pervasive driver.” A large majority of programmers, the researchers discovered, reported that they frequently reached the state of optimal challenge called “flow.””
Daniel Pink.        Drive


I have said earlier that this period of 1984 onwards is a period of diffusion of my knowledge and modern computer and network  technology. This meant a lot of travels .
 I did it through  hundreds of lectures in more than 300 colleges, schools and universities. Then I went a step further. I started running courses in many colleges and universities which gave a startup boost. Then I took the next step of architecting computer labs and also helping in the purchase of computers and integrating with networks.
Then I took the next step of helping the institutions in developing a modern curriculum. 
Then I helped in recruiting faculty members. 
Later I did computer architecting , computer selection, networking  and software selection for many research labs and government departments including KSRTC, Bangalore diary, land army, mysore paper mills, and many others. It is a long list. We will discuss it in detail. 
 Let me continue discussions of  my association with Prof KAK, MCE, Hassan . He wanted to apply for a network program supported by UGC. So I gave a letter saying we are willing to network with them, and  support them academically . He got the project and  funds. 
Next, he wanted to start a MTech program on computers and communications. It was the first PG program to be run by an engineering college in a modern and relevant area.   He sent a proposal to UGC for approval and he put my name as a supporting and advising expert. I heard from UGC that they liked the proposal, they were happy with my association  and sanctioned it. 
I taught two courses for this MTech program. This was the starting of my involvement with teaching computer courses like data structures,  operating systems and databases in many institutions and universities over the next two decades. I continued this till 2000. Most colleges and some universities started computer science and engineering programs , but they didn't have enough knowledgeable faculty. Most employed electrical or electronics faculty to teach CS courses. It was a very bad situation . I felt that a push is needed for providing a standard form for CS in our colleges. So despite enormous inconveniences and physical stress , I supported this outreach activity in several colleges and universities in karnataka , Tamil Nadu and Andhra. It was a way of my helping in the generation and growth of CS expertise in the country beyond those coming from IISc and IITs. Today I feel happy about it .
I taught at MCE Hassan for a few years. I had to travel by ordinary bus for four hours . It wasn't easy. Their budget is minimal and couldn't put me in a good hotel. 
More in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
20/07/24, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 421
“In real life our behavior is far more complex than the textbook allows and often confounds the idea that we’re purely rational. We don’t save enough for retirement even though it’s to our clear economic advantage to do so. We hang on to bad investments longer than we should, because we feel far sharper pain from losing money than we do from gaining the exact same amount.” 
Daniel Pink       Drive

During our international conference , I met Prof Santana Krishnan from TCE Madurai, my Alma mater. He requested me to visit the college and I agreed. So in 1985 , I visited TCE after more than 20 years of gap. I didn't visit before, surprising. I gave lectures for four days. Prof Nityanandan was the principal. He became a good friend. After that my visit to TCE became regular and my association continues till now  . I lectured at most of their conferences, seminars , short term courses and also  lectures to faculty and students. I have been with their academic council for decades. I also played a significant role in faculty selections . I had great interactions with many principals like Prof MV Ramamurthy, Prof R Srinivasan, Prof Abhaykumar and Prof Raja and provided advice on academics, curriculum and  administration. I am very happy that I could return a bit of my gratitude to my college. 

Another principal with whom I had a good association was Prof Viswanath of Gogte institute of Technology , Belgaum.  I visited his college for a few years and delivered lectures to students. 
I started teaching in the newly set up NMAMIT at Nitte  . That is where I met Prof NR Shetty ,Principal,  KREC. That association also continued for a very long time. I assisted him in Bangalore university when he was the vice chancellor there . 
Prof Radhakrishnan was the head of the computer science department . He didn't know much about computers. He invited me to teach two courses for their BE computer science students. I also met Mr Sridhar Hegde, principal of the college at that time.  I agreed to their request  and taught both computer organisation and data structures courses followed by a course on operating systems in the next year. 
Nitte is a small city. I went by a night bus to karkala.  Col.  BSGK Murthy received me at the bus stand and put me up in their hostel. I was upset. I went to the college and took the lectures. At lunch time - food was supplied in their  canteen- , I told him and later the principal that I didn't like the stay arrangements made by them . So they came with me in the evening and put me in a hotel close to the bus stand. 
During one of my visits, we visited the Gomateshwara  statue on a hillock  . I felt chest pain , still continued with my lectures.  
After returning from Karkala, I got a stress test done by Dr Ramesh, a cardiologist. He said there is a problem. We decided to consult a cardiologist in bombay. We left our children alone at our quarters in iisc , left by air to Bombay.  We stayed in  the Bombay Suburban guest house and met Dr Nair . He did an angio next day. It showed  one block, but in the right ventricular artery. So he ruled out surgery, put me on medication. That was in 1989, I think. 
Greetings
Dks
21/07/24, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 422

“if people do things for lunk-headed, backward-looking reasons, why wouldn’t we also do things for significance-seeking, self-actualizing reasons? If we’re predictably irrational—and we clearly are—why couldn’t we also be predictably transcendent?”

For some people work remains routine, unchallenging, and directed by others. But for a surprisingly large number of people, jobs have become more complex, more interesting, and more self-directed. And that type of work presents a direct challenge to the assumptions of Motivation 2.0.
The consulting firm McKinsey & Co. estimates that in the United States, only 30 percent of job growth now comes from algorithmic work, while 70 percent comes from heuristic work. A key reason: Routine work can be outsourced or automated; artistic, empathic, nonroutine work generally cannot.
“Intrinsic motivation is conducive to creativity; controlling extrinsic motivation is detrimental to creativity.”

Daniel Pink.  Drive

Let me explain my problem with chest pain and my actions on that problem. 
When I felt the chest pain in Nitte that afternoon, I could have ignored that. I went to IISc health center on my return from Karkala .  Our doctor did an ECG and said I am fine. Three doctors said that I was overstressed and I should rest after lunch. This not once but several times whenever  I got chest pain. But I was concerned about the occurrence at karkala and felt I should do something about it. Only Dr Subba Rao, our CMO supported me. Even though IISc will not reimburse my expenses - it wasn't small and it ran into more than 30000 rupees expenses then, still  I decided to go through checkups. So first I did the stress test in Bangalore . Then we went to Bombay for an angiogram to be done. It saved me. 
So here it is my perseverance and both algorithmic and heuristic thinking that worked for me. I didn't believe in the opinions of our doctors except Dr Subba Rao.  
My next assignment was teaching a course at IIM Bangalore.  IIM ,even in 1985,  wasn't concerned about the technological developments and their impacts on businesses. It had a dated and conventional PG diploma program in management.  Some students met me and wanted me to teach a course on computer systems. I agreed. The institute approved my course. So I started teaching at IIM . It was difficult to travel to IIM Bangalore from IISc . I needed to take two buses . The bus to Bannerghatta was a rural bus. It was tough. Still I managed to teach for about 5 years regularly in IIM Bangalore.  Then as I found travel difficult, I told them that I won't be able to teach the course. I met several faculty there and had good interactions. 
I visited MIT Manipal several times for lectures.
There are two major instances I want to recollect. 
One was the fact that I did a full course on UNIX. That was the first time Unix was taught in the country and the first time I taught Unix. Prof Prithviraj organized these lectures . He put me in a small hotel then. The course went off well. 
Later  , MIT Manipal got a new principal during the late eighties. Prof APrabhakar became the principal. I knew him from his days in Osmania university.  I knew his brother Prof   A Ramakrishnan, his brother in law Prof KS Narendra and his nephew A Srinivasan . He started a PG MTech program in computer science. He invited me to give courses on data structures and operating systems.  I visited Manipal three times to conduct the courses. My iisc colleague Rajaram was the head then. He was agitated even on small issues like chalk pieces and duster. 
These teaching activities revealed the almost primitive state of the engineering colleges . That is not only on  infrastructure , lab facilities and curriculum , but also in the mindsets of the principals and faculty. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
21/07/24, 7:34 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sir, we really appreciate your commitment and effort in enhancing engineering education in regular colleges.
22/07/24, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 423
“Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it -- namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to do, and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers or performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in England who drive four-horse passenger coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn it into work and then they would resign.”
Mark Twain.     Stories of Tom sawyer 

Let me look at some more institutions where I ran a full course. 
DRDO came up with a scheme of getting young BSc passed graduates and giving them a specialized two year MSc program in computer science . One of the  universities chosen was Madurai Kamaraj university and another was Mysore university. I was given a special visiting professor status at MK university. I taught several courses for two to three years. Prof Chandrasekaran from the Physics department was the coordinator . He was a serious researcher . I visited the university several times to teach data structures and operating systems. I helped in the selection of a few lecturers and an assistant professor who became the head of the department later. I also helped a rural based student to write a paper. I took my family on one visit. We stayed in the guest house. Food was good. We took all the students for dinner in the city.  There was a near tragedy for our return. We asked a faculty member to book our return tickets by the karnataka bus. The karnataka super deluxe bus was better than the Tamilnadu bus. It also had better maintenance and breakdowns were less than the Tamilnadu buses. So i prefered karnataka buses for travel.  The faculty member booked our seats  ,  but didn't come and deliver the tickets. Prof Chandrasekaran was upset. We took a car to his house . He said he bought the reservations but when he called the guest house, they told him that I had left. So he didn't come to the university. It was gladly resolved. We left by the night bus. 
All that was a great experience. My son enjoyed the stay. 
I became a UGC Visiting fellow and spent 15 days at SV University.  I taught a full course of operating systems there. I split the  two weeks into two visits of six days each. During my second visit two incidents happened. 
One was that I started vomiting due to some food poisoning. I had to eat in a hotel in the Tirupati Town and that was the cause. Anyway I was better the next day. The second was that the marriage of Mr KVK Vijayakumar was held in Tirupati at that time. I attended the marriage on both days. There was a lot of police presence as his eldest brother was a DIG. 
I also taught operating systems in SK university , Anantapur for MCA students. Similarly I taught two courses for the management students of TAPMI in Manipal. Anil Revankar who was an officer of KSCST, was a faculty member at TAPMI.  I took my wife and son for one visit. We went by a KSRTC night bus. It turned turtle after crossing Sakleshpur . We were lucky that the area was a flat land. We could get out of the bus safely. We were not hurt. We took another bus and reached Manipal. 
I taught a database course for MCA students in  Bangalore university when NR Shetty was the vice chancellor.  I also taught in  Mangalore university, Mysore university and Karnataka university . 
I taught distributed operating systems for the first time at REC Trichy. I also taught at KREC for their MTech SACA program.  
BDT college of engineering at Davangere , the only government college ,started BE computer science program.  Prof Bhandari, principal requested me to start the program by teaching the first course. Later he became DTE .
I had conducted a course on decision support systems for the PG students at Asian Institute of Technology,  Bangkok.  I visited Bangkok for three months in the summer of 1987 to teach this course.  It was a new experience. 
My experiences were mixed. Let us see in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
23/07/24, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 424 

Om Bhadram Karnnebhih Shrnnuyaama Devaah |
Bhadram Pashyema-Akssabhir-Yajatraah |
Sthirair-Anggais-Tussttuvaamsas-Tanuubhih |
Vyashema Deva-Hitam Yad-Aayuh |

Meaning:
1: O Devas, May we Hear with our Ears what is Auspicious,
2: O (Devas who are) Worthy of Worship, May we See with our Eyes what is Auspicious,
3: With (Sense) Organs Steady and Body Praying (due to Hearing and Seeing the Auspicious) ...
4: ... May we Attain (i.e. Spend) the Lifespan allotted by the Devas (thus finding fulfillment in our lives).
Upanishads

Let me summarise my experiences. 
The infrastructure in most institutions was poor. There were not enough computers. Class rooms were not clean. Sometimes, it was an effort to find a vacant classroom or open one. 
The curriculum was not modern or good. It was mostly framed by electronics or electrical faculty. It had many general courses and many electrical and electronics courses. The saddest part was a low emphasis for programming and solving large problems. It pained me a lot. I had argued with many about this state. 
While many students were just above average, there were quite a few who were very bright.  I remember one student at Nitte, one at BIET,  and a few at Madurai and several in many colleges. 
Some students  from MTech programs taught by me joined as faculty in many colleges thereby strengthening the CS department.  
Many learnt rigour and quality from me. 
Many were motivated. 
Many got jobs. 
So I felt happy with my contributions. I felt I should do my best to improve this situation. I recalled the effort put by some CS faculty in famous universities like UCB teaching in many universities to improve the quality of CS education. 
In addition , I have delivered a series of lectures in many colleges and universities and IDRBT, Hyderabad.  I gave two courses for Future software company in Madras.  
In addition I have delivered lectures in many industries like TCS, CMC, DOS, etc.
I have also given several short term courses and tutorials on OS, databases, distributed transactions processing, federated databases, computer systems, etc at IISc, CSI , IEEE,  IE and Indian computer conference . I will discuss my proficience courses later. 
All these were done in addition to lectures and keynote addresses , paper presentations in hundreds of institutions and conferences and my regular academic, research and project activities in IISc.  
All these activities continued for decades. But I increased my activities in the period 1985 to 2004 and even beyond. 
I realised that I had the capacity to do more. I felt I should do more for the growth of computer culture in the country. I never thought about my health seriously but never ignored the precautions needed for good health. 
Greetings 
Dks
23/07/24, 8:01 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Amazing quote Sir! All accreditations and rankings in the academics, if not done in the right way, are focusing on  extrinsic goals, making them 'work'. Why do research? Because there are x points in NBA. <This message was edited>
24/07/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 425

“உண்டதேயுண்டு முடுத்ததேயுடுத்து மடுத்தடுத்துரைத்த யுரைத்தும்,
கண்டதேகண்டுங் கேட்டதேகேட்டுங் கழிந்தனக நாளெல்லாம்,
விண்டதா மரைமேலன்னம் வீற்றிருக்கும்விழ வீதிவெண்காடா,
அண்டரேபோற்ற வம்பலத்தாடுமையனேயு மாறருளே.
You eat the same  everyday 
You dress the same everyday
You speak the same - gossip
You see the same everyday
You hear the same everyday 
That is how you spend all your days.
Look for a better live. 
Look for salvation “
Pattinathar 

A question arises 
Why did I do all these extra , non remunerative activities ?
I visited more than 300 institutions , schools, universities and conferences in India and abroad? Why?
No visit gave me money or fame or award. Still I did it. Why?
I travelled by bus to most small towns and there was no direct train to madurai from Bangalore. Still I went to Trichy by train and took a bus or took a night bus. Many travels were not easy. Still I did it. Why?
I got diabetes in 1978 itself. Many would have stopped most of these travels and lectures. I have seen that both my father and my uncles didn't walk and got tired easily. They couldn't work long. But fortunately, I got my long walking habits from childhood  . That came from my elder uncle , Narayana Sarma , . As a child of six, I used to walk with him for miles with enthusiasm and wasn't feeling tired. That habit helped me even after I had diabetes.  
To add to that , I got a heart problem by 1987. Definitely , most wouldn't dare to travel regularly by bus. Most will sit and commiserate and worry about their health. I increased my activities. I didn't allow my health problems to come in the way of my travels and talks. I didn't ignore my health . I took a lot of precautions. Why did I do all these? 
The answers are
1.I liked to lecture. I wanted to give my knowledge to others. That was an innate feeling that came from my family background. 
2.I felt that education was not in a good shape and let me do my best to help in improving computer science education , which was in a bad shape. 
3.I felt happy talking to young and different types of students. 
4.I was curious to know about our computer culture, computer absorption and spread. That is why I got involved with TCS and many others. I was also curious about our education system. These visits gave me an opportunity to know and help. Today, if we are in a leadership position in IT global services , it is due to a synergic efforts of engineering colleges and agile  IT companies. I played a small part in focusing the awareness towards applications . 
5. I never went after money. That is  due to my family value system. Our family for generations  was frugal, ethical  and satisfied . They valued scholarship. I inculcated that spirit in me. I also never bothered about awards. 
Greetings 
Dks
25/07/24, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 426
“Studies have shown that children at the age of 4 years  may ask anywhere from one hundred to three hundred questions a day (interestingly, some research shows the four-year-old girl asks even more questions than a boy of that age. She is the ultimate questioning machine.)
Questioning at these early ages may seem like child’s play, but it’s a complex, high-order level of thinking. It requires enough awareness to know that one does not know—and the ingenuity to begin to do something to remedy that. As the Harvard University–based child psychologist Paul Harris points out, young children discover early on that the information they seek can be easily extracted from other human beings, merely by using that certain combination of words and vocal inflection that forms a question.”
Warren Berger.  The book of beautiful questions

Let's continue the discussions about my intentions and work culture .
Did I stop the activities because of my health conditions  ?
The answer is no. Instead I enlarged  my activities into improving computer absorption in industries, governments, institutions, banks and NGOs. My activities were increasing year by year and reached their peak post retirement. 
Did I want to do something that I didn't do?
My regrets : I wanted to write text books. But I was reluctant. Because I see the fast pace of technological advances  and was worried about books becoming dated and obsolete.  I wrote almost about 80% of a book on operating systems and most of another book on energy resources ,utilization and conservation. Then I lost interest as I wasn't happy. Both books were not copies from other books. Both were based on my experiences, my understanding, my perceptions and teaching . I wasn't sure who would read them.

I asked the question why I did all these activities in the last post. Let  me continue it from another angle. 
Let me look at my life paths and reason some actions. Let me go back and look at a couple of major things that happened and my reactions. 
1.I have always found alternate paths under adversarial circumstances . I used to always prepare and follow two or more paths . 
When I found in 1970 that power systems research wasn't appreciated in IISc and in the world and most researchers moved to control systems, I decided to switch to computer science research. Later , I switched my areas from operating systems to databases to transactions processing to data mining. 

But when I found that  rural energy research was not appreciated, I plunged into it for more than two decades both in ASTRA and CES.  I had a PhD student - Dr KM Chetty-  working on optimisation of rural energy centres. I even did a district level energy plan for Uttara kannada district. TV Ramachandra worked on this model and prepared a total plan. 

Later I worked on sustainable living models . I developed a total energy model for hydro projects.  I developed a model for development planning based on carrying capacity for Dakshina kannada district. 

2.Why these  contradictory approaches - one switch due to a popular area like computers and another to an unpopular area like rural energy? 
It is not algorithmic thinking but heuristic and deep thinking that worked in both cases and made me take a good decision both times. It is due to my flexible approach and open mind. 
There was an internal urge in me telling me - “do something different . Don't do the same thing again and again like what Pattinathar said . It is that internal urge which pushed me in my actions , not any other motivations. No one told me what I should do , which direction I should move,  what is good for me etc. 
Similarly  I also didn't force my children to follow my ideas. If I say something , they may resist it. I gave them general thoughts. But they followed what they wanted and I am happy about them now - they defined their paths and are happy with their activities. Their curiosities were kindled and are helping them. They have sharp minds to understand many views of a problem and decide. 
I wanted them to walk many paths and look for many options and alternatives. 
That doesn't mean that I am not interested in their approach to life. I did discuss generally about their path , introduced them to good habits and scholarly approaches. So I encouraged both to have a good scholarship . They observed our frugal living. Through many travels with me, they saw the country and the behaviours of people. A simple nudge worked though sometimes  after a violent argument,   particularly with my daughter. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
26/07/24, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 427
“The wisdom of the highest scriptures, the doctrines of all sacred texts, the epics of the gods and wise sagas of life, the science of mantras, yantras, and so on, powerful incantations, the wisdom passed to each generation, the sacred teachings of those who worship the Absolute as Divine Father or Mother, and other revered works – all these doctrines and creeds only bring the downfall of those whose minds are restless and deluded.” Siva to Sakti. 
Guru Gita

Let me continue my self introspection and analysis.
3.That urge for looking for new aspects and learning them is evident from my concentration on teaching several courses at IISc and more than 20 institutions. I never shied away from things and areas that are unknown to me. I plunged into new learnings and new areas without fear and it continues even now.  I do it even now- the urge to learn new aspects  to understand nature, knowledge  ,   people, society, world. I was technological then and philosophical now.
4. In addition to my involvement in computer education in engineering institutions  , I looked at another area . I assisted in computer purchases in hundreds of institutions, government offices, banks . I also participated in many activities of NGOs.
5.  One of my major social and educational activities was the MahithiSindhu program of Mr SM Krishna, CM of karnataka to computerize 1000 schools at one go. It was a highly challenging job and most senior  officers stayed away from it. But I executed it successfully with cooperation and understanding from Mr Vijayabhaskar, commissioner of education then and Mr Viswanath, Minister of education. It was the first time we undertook a massive transformation in school education and put all our efforts into it. We were happy with the outcome. I had many learnings from that and will discuss it later. 
I realized that balance in life implies multiple paths - academic, social etc. I wasn't involved in direct politics ,but kept in touch with many politicians. 
Let me look at some important happenings  in my personal and family life. I want to discuss three happenings here. 
One was the death of my father immediately after I moved into IISc quarters. My father visited my malleswaram house several times and he felt that it was a good house from the Spiritual point of view. He was unfortunate not to visit my IISc quarters. Many will say that the quarters was unlucky for me. I should have stayed in malleswaram.  I didn't believe in it. I continued in IISc quarters. So here my rationalist approach worked. 
So adapt your thinking and actions. 
The next was my health - diabetes.  I felt I should do my best to handle this and should not curtail my other activities. My survival needed only the IISc job , not the other activities and associated travels. I didn't reduce any of my activities or travels but increased them despite certain difficulties. That is my positive mindset - let me take the bull by its horns as they say, don't run away, don't commiserate and worry. Adjust and adapt. 
The third was  the importance of following a regular discipline in  life. I adapted a regular regimen of activities on mindfulness, walking, yoga, food control, regular intake of medicine, regular consultations, regular testing- this I continued without fail for about 50 years . That has made me live actively this long. That is a miracle according to me . 

So the lessons from these are :
One should Lead a balanced, positive, flexible, adaptable and multidimensional life. Living  is not a binary activity either this or that . Living is this, that and that - awareness, mindfulness, positive approach, regularity, wisdom to choose, heuristic and algorithmic (not or) thinking and actions, contemplation before and after a decision, improving consciousness .
Strong, inflexible opinions need to be used only on some occasions, but  not always. Is it possible to have both a flexible and inflexible mind or as people advocate an either or binary thinking? Everyone should contemplate this seriously. It is not easy. 
 I followed both rationalism and common sense but not radicalism . I followed science and spirituality. I felt the need or urge for humanism not mechanical living . 
Humanism is not understood or taught in schools and even by parents. They follow the dictum “ what I don't know, my children need not know”.

The purpose of my writing these aspects can be stated as:
Others can learn from these and build their children and students. 
That concludes my discussions on my moving around these 40 plus years. 
Greetings
Dks
27/07/24, 6:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 428
Some comments.
Nitya Ananthakrishnan

Wow.....your achievements and involvement in multiple disciplines are really mind blowing. You are also repeatedly stressing in your posts about the values of simple living, being honest and contented and the interest in sharing your knowledge with others.

Your opening quote today from Pattinathar is really very apt, highlighting the actions of most of us. 🙂

Prof Raviprakash   ,principal SSIT Tumkur
“Good morning. We are all the fortunate ones, that are witness to what all a little you have expressed here. It was still a lot you had done/have been doing all through your life. Your words expressed here are the the real motivating factors for all youngsters to follow and practice. Thanks a lot.”

Dr S Ramakrishnan 
My dear  nephew, 

Hats  off  to   you,  Your  giant and  gigantic  strides   in  innovative  Research,   teaching,  technical  and   technological  expertise,  Instrumentation,   association   with  Universities,  Institutes  of  Higher  Learning, colleges  and   schools,   teachers and   students,   and   your Presidential   and  key-note   addresses  and   publications   are   phenomenal   and   fantastic,   In the  last   week,  I   was  preparing   a draft  suggesting  to  you   to  apply  for   D,Sc,   degree  as  you  have   more  than  ample   material  by  way  of  highly  original  innovative  work, But  in  your  recent  post,  you   write  you  are   not  enamored  of  awards,  money  etc,,  You  only   like   fo  give   lectures  and   be   of  service,,  I  would   be   happy   if  you apply   for   D,Sc,   You   would   get   it    effortlessly     You  can  continue   your    lectures  and   Service, 

Yours  affectionately ,      Ramakrishnan,   Uncle  
24 -  7  -  24

Thanks to all
More comments in the next
Greetings
Dks
28/07/24, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 429
“Any place where the guru dwells is the holy land of Kashi; the water that washes 
the guru’s feet is the Ganges. The guru is the Lord of the Universe perceptible to the 
eyes. Indeed, the guru is Brahma, the Savior.
17. Water that has been poured over the guru's feet is the pilgrimage site, Gaya. It is 
the holy banyan tree, it is Akshaya, and Prayag, the meeting place of the sacred 
Ganges, Yamuna, and Saraswati Rivers. Salutations again and again to the guru.
18. Always lovingly recollect the guru's divine form, constantly repeat the mantra the 
guru has given. Follow the guru’s guidance with your mind absorbed on nothing other 
than the guru.
20. With your heart absorbed in nothing but the guru, let go of attachments to your 
status as student, spouse, parent, and to your social standing, fame, and cravings for 
accumulating wealth.”
Guru Gita 

Mr. N Ramanathan has provided detailed comments. 
“When you are passionate about a thing, everything else including family, takes a back seat. So little wonder that you had pushed yourself too hard in the bargain.
Again at a tender age, we used to walk for long distances to attend school or buy small household items. In my mother’s village, there used to be no water in the canal during summer months and every morning we had to walk for a couple of miles to take bath in the river. Travel was in a crowded bus or train. One was physically stressed out on several counts. As a beneficial fall out, we were mentally tuned to accept travel hardship even after much improved life style in later years. My experience was similar to yours, when I had to frequently travel between Madurai and Bengaluru in the 80s on official work. But you have done same for a public cause.
Money is very necessary for survival but never a motivator for achieving excellence. It’s more so in the case of academicians and those involved in R & D. But awards and recognitions are clear motivators and these should have come in good measure in your case. Of course you are not the loser.”

Thanks. 
Mrs  Rukmani Anantharaman gives more detailed comments:
“Dear Anna,
Namaskarams.
Your analysis of how you have led your life is highly inspirational. You have set high standards for yourself-
adopting  a positive,rational and humane approach ,  following a strict and  disciplined regimen and not letting adverse health conditions affect your efforts  towards quenching your insatiable thirst for exploring new concepts,etc etc.
As always,I cannot find enough words to express my admiration for your contribution to society  in various fields- teaching,research and administration , in modernising computer education, in  environmental projects,in the energy and power sector ,in the field of education both in the primary as well as college levels -- the list goes on.
I am reminded of the verse  by the tamil  poet Kambar who said 
"ஓசை பெற்று உயர் பாற்கடல் உற்று, ஒரு
பூசை முற்றவும் நக்குபு புக்கென,
ஆசை பற்றி அறையலுற்றேன் – மற்று, இக்
காசு இல் கொற்றத்து இராமன் கதைஅரோ!          
Kamban Says, “ Like the cat standing on the shores of the Ocean of Milk desiring to lick the ocean clean, I have ventured ,out of my sheer desire, to sing  the story of Rama,one with impeccable character and great valour"
I feel just like this cat standing in front of the  great ocean of your  knowledge,trying to grasp a few drops.
I take this opportunity to seek your help regarding the following:
Being a donor , you are aware of the construction of the new school building for Sri Kamakoti Oriental High School at Villupuram.We hope to complete the work in six month's time.It is a tiny school with a strength of about five hundred students in the age group of 11 to 15, most of them first generation learners.
I will be thankful to you if you can guide me with the procurement of computers for this school.Our requirement is not much,may be only in double digits,  as the classes are only till 10th standard.We intend providing smart boards in every classroom.These will be needed only after a few months,when  we complete the construction fully .I am yet to discuss this with the other Trustees,I am writing this impulsively on seeing your post today.I think that your inputs will be very valuable to us.
 I had some hesitation  about troubling you with such a trivial matter but I overcame my inhibitions and have taken liberty  because I felt that  you are genuinely interested in helping out with educational projects, big or small.
I shall get back to you in due course of time , if you don't mind.
Thank you for enriching us daily  with your profound thoughts and interesting life experiences.
Namaskarams.”

Thanks. I Will be happy to help. I am a bit rusty on PC market. Let us discuss . We need to decide on desktops or laptops. Each has advantages and disadvantages. And the next question is branded or assembled. Whether you want standalone or networked is another question. The whole thing depends on budget available and its better usage. These are some points for your teachers to ponder. 
We can workout . No problems from my side.

Rajalakshmi Lokanathan keeps encouraging me through voice messages at regular intervals. Her comments are:

“Congratulations 
Very proud to have you as our family member 
Expecting to get the full experience in the form of a book.”

Many have made similar comments on publishing a book . I want to , but I need help, not financial , but rewriting it.
Thanks for all the encouragement that I received from many friends and relatives who receive these posts. 
Greetings.
Dks
29/07/24, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 430

In early 2000s, rising environmental concerns had begun to stir the first rumblings of a backlash against all the nonessential “stuff” proliferated by designers, much of it disposable but not recyclable. As the economy contracted, those overdesigned and overpriced goods came to be seen as not just inaccessible but inappropriate. The world seemed to be crying out for a different kind of design: no less creative but more responsible and resourceful, with a greater emphasis on solving problems, embracing constraints, and doing more with less.”
Warren Berger “  CAD monkeys, —”

Let me return to 1984 and get going on my future activities. My research and teaching continued with more focus on databases. 
As I said earlier , I continued as chair of CSI . I organised many conferences in this period. 
CSI wanted to focus on scientific and engineering applications. We ran the first national science and engineering applications conference. We started a new conference series on data called COMAD. I was part of this group for a few years. Some people wanted to create confusion. So they started another annual conference called CISMOD. My friends in CSI wanted me to talk to them . I didn't consider CISMOD as an enemy. I participated in some CISMOD conferences and delivered keynote speeches. I also attended a few COMAD conferences. 
Well ,two  turning points happened at this juncture. One was on AI. We had discussions on AI and sanskrit based on a paper by R Briggs in an AI journal. It excited many of us. Prof Mahabala wanted to have an international conference. So I agreed to chair the conference. There were many novelties in this conference. We decided to conduct it in the Sankar mutt premises. Swami Paramananda Bharati was keen on this conference. We decided to invite both sanskrit scholars and computer scientists. 
The title was “Knowledge Representation in Samskritam . “. It was sponsored by CSI. We invited Briggs and a few more came from abroad. We got several Sanskrit  scholars from North and South.  Many Professors from IIT participated. N Seshagiri gave a talk on Sphota theory. He gave a new interpretation to the sphota theory. Prof Satchidananda murthy , vice chairman,  UGC inaugurated the conference. 
We went through a lot of preparations for conducting the conference and had several meetings in Sankar mutt  . We got a lot of national publicity from TV and All India Radio. It was a great event. We met Shringeri Jagadguru Abhinava vidya teertha Bharati swami after the conference. 
I also gave several talks in the institution of engineers. I became the chair if the computer engineering board also. 
The second turning point happened after a discussion with Dr PJ Naik , additional secretary planning. Even though I was no more in the government in a formal position, I was invited and consulted by my successor , Prof Prahlada Rao. I assisted him in selecting scientific officers. I continued my associations with the government in several departments.  My discussions with PJ Naik was about the Karnataka government computer centre and how to make it better. We decided to setup a high power committee to handle computer purchases under the chairmanship of the secretary to chief minister. Later it was shifted to the additional chief secretary. I was to become a key member of this committee. It was a long journey. I will discuss in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
30/07/24, 5:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 431
“Our belief system is our personal truth that governs our mind. Our judgments are all based on our belief system, even if they tend to challenge our innermost nature. There’s a part of our mind that constantly evaluates everything and everyone. There’s also another part that receives all the judgments and carries the guilt, blame, and shame.
Your belief system makes you fear anything that goes against it. Whatever it is that makes you question your beliefs will certainly bring you a sense of insecurity. This is the main reason why it’s necessary to have the courage to argue regarding our beliefs.”
Don't Miguel Ruiz

I need to describe the technological milieu we were living in the eighties. A technological explosion was happening quietly and most people including computer and management professionals in India  weren't aware of its impacts and didn't understand its significance. They lived in the previous era of costly mainframe computing. 
What happened then?
The arrival of IBM PC. 
It brought a vast turbulence in our understanding. It transformed many sectors.  It reduced the cost of a computer by several orders of magnitude - from crores of rupees to a lakh. A country which had a handful of mainframes and another handful of minicomputers suddenly found itself in a situation where thousands of computers can reach people at an affordable cost. 

I was upset that most institutions in India started computer science programs without any inhouse computing facility. Now all institutions and all industries can afford a centralised computing facility.  
Let me look at the micro processor history briefly. Computers were initially recognized by the hardware technologies and software was a standby item. The first generation computers used vacuum tubes and were difficult to operate. You spend time removing blown tubes and heat generated was very high. 
 The second generation in the late fifties used transistors. They had a very simple programming language. The two computers I used in 1965 at NAL and HAL were second generation computers. Then came the great invention - integrated circuits. It was possible to put together a circuit consisting of several transistors in a small silicon sheet. It reduced space requirements, costs  and also power requirements. It was more reliable. 
Then came the breakthrough- very large integration - putting thousands of transistors in a small sheet , now known as a chip. It looked like a potato chip in size. While Fairchild started the VLSI chips, Intel produced the first 4 bits  processor in 1971. But it was used in calculators , not useful in a computer. Zilog came with an 8 bits processor which found a lot of uses in telecom and micro controller industries. 
Intel went into designing and producing new processors starting with a popular 8 bits 8085 and then moving on to 16 bits procesdors 8086, 80186, 80286, 80386 etc. I built a desktop with a 80286 processor and used it for more than 15 years. Then came 32 bits processors packing lakhs of transistors. 
A big competitor to Intel was Motorola. They also came with 6800 processors followed by 16 bits 68000, 68010, 68020 etc. These processors had 32 bits operational capabilities and hence were superior to the contemporary Intel processors. 
Initially the PCs had an elementary operating system like CP/M. Later Bill Gates and Microsoft built a primitive and error prone and user unfriendly operating system known as MSDOS. It became popular . So we had a usable system . We'll one can use it to run simple programs and type documents. It looked like a front-end terminal and not a great computer . 
Let us see more of this in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
30/07/24, 7:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post E1
I am initiating a new discussion relating to spirituality and humanism vs commercialism in educating our children . I was and am concerned with many aspects of education throughout my life - what are we , parents and teachers supposed to do ? 
I have some questions about our schooling and upbringing of children .
Maybe I have some glimpses, but I feel uncomfortable with the current system. I don't think we can change it. But we need to post and discuss these questions. I am posing a few questions here . Looking for answers . I am happy if you as social entities and not as experts ask questions, think ,analyse and find answers. 
My clarifications.
1.I am sure there are a lot of positives in our education system  . It made us to think rationally, to direct our focus to problem solving, made us to understand the scientific concepts, made us strong in mathematics  and made us to  understand one view of the society .
2. It produced a lot of successful people - engineers, doctors, scientists , managers and politicians. 
3. Due to education, our standard of living improved. 
4. Education allowed for constant improvements in innovation , introduction of new technologies and management of the many complex systems in the country. 
5. It made the country to move forward to a good percentage of the people. 
But there are some concerns  that I am posing below. 
 1.Schooling today - a necessary torture to children ,parents and society?
2.Does it provide education, provide a moral basis for a society or should it. ?
3. Is this a positive forward movement?
4. Focus on stem - is it correct?
4.Should you force the children to adapt to your way of living?
5.Should you push your beliefs onto children ?
6. Are we making children into straight jacketed one dimensional morons suitable for factory work?
7.Do the children understand humans and interrelationships with nature ?
8. Do the children understand humanism?
9. Are the theories of human psychologists correct ?
10  Why are we ignoring common sense and depending on rationalism and experts?
11. Is common sense dying or destroyed? 
12. Why do algorithmic approaches dominate society today? 
13. Is there a subtle intoxication of people by the system and misguided but opinionated and motivated  intellectuals.?
14. is there a role for moralism or none?
15. who is responsible for educating people?
I am not asking how do we change the system. Because, I doubt whether we have understood the concepts,  motives, and workings of education system. Our gurukula had two components - one purely spiritual , another living skills and a third overlying aspect - understanding humans. 
I want to create some awareness to focus on common sense and realities 
Welcome comments and discussions. 
Greetings
Dks
31/07/24, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 432
“Simply sit down and write down five reasons why you failed. Now, you know what you have to work on; it might hurt doing this but it’s about as positive an action as you can get.  Taking this on is going to make your life much easier than ever before – so do it every time you fail. Failure is a journey, not the destination! 
If you don’t try to change this then you can prepare for a life of self-deprecating and a lack of self-belief. By reviewing failure, solutions become viable. 
 By looking and reviewing your success and failure it will become much easier to stay on the right track. It’ll also greatly increase the chances of finding a long-term solution.”
Michael Chapman   ‘ positive thinking ‘


 I was fortunate to have a front seat and watch and participate in the fast paced developments in the areas of computers, internet and web, parallel  processing  , software engineering,  data bases , graphics, networking  , information technologies, knowledge engineering and AI.  The developments were happening in parallel in many areas and hundreds of researchers , developers were working in many areas. Many new industries developed , quite a good number out of good universities.
The arrival of several concepts and technologies like VLSI,PCs, the bus concept for internal connectivity as well as external connectivity, the flexibility, a new look on OS, touch screen,  etc led to one revolution. Simultaneously software became an engineering activity with increased complexity. Data was looked at differently . AI went in another parallel path towards , natural language understanding, pattern recognition, speech processing, identifications, expert systems etc  . So a highly packed set of anticipation and excitement rose in many of us. These slowly crept into India with a time lag. But definitely from mid eighties India experienced these developments . India focused more on software development for applications. 
I saw the entire computer concepts already developed over the years being re enacted for PCs. It was a very interesting and exciting series of developments to me as  a researcher. 
The first biggest international achievement and transformation was to  take computers from isolated and expensive glass houses  to people. Computers till then were viewed like nuclear reactors - costly,isolated, very special entities not approachable and not understood by even many engineers , scientists and mathematicians leave alone the common man. 
While we found it difficult to get into computer manufacturing, the arrival of VLSI, processors, motherboard , memory chips , buses made it easier to build PCs locally. So India in the eighties moved to PC manufacturing as a major business. We were in the computer trading business with companies like Hinditron ,and computronics  . But now it changed.  Many companies came up. The notable ones were DCM, ORG, mostly in the calculator era in the seventies , but not very much in the PC era . These were followed by Zenith, HCL, Wipro, Pertech, PCL, etc . Zenith was popular with its super brain machines. I bought many of them. Later I bought hundreds from the other companies. HCL was quite popular. 
Stand alone PCs were not useful except for word processing and file management. 
So we came up with a solution for servers. All companies not only produced PCs , but started developing and manufacturing servers  . They needed a multiuser OS. How did it happen? Let us see in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
01/08/24, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 433
“Most of us have adopted a strategy to get along called satisficing, a term coined by the Nobel Prize winner Herbert Simon, one of the founders of the fields of organization theory and information processing. Simon wanted a word to describe not getting the very best option but one that was good enough. For things that don’t matter critically, we make a choice that satisfies us and is deemed sufficient. 
Satisficing is one of the foundations of
productive human behavior; it prevails when we don’t waste time on decisions that
don’t matter, or more accurately, when we don’t waste time trying to find
improvements that are not going to make a significant difference in our happiness or
satisfaction.
All of us engage in satisficing every time we clean our homes. If we got down on
the floor with a toothbrush every day to clean the grout, if we scrubbed the windows
and walls every single day, the house would be spotless. But few of us go to this much
trouble even on a weekly basis (and when we do, we’re likely to be labeled
obsessive-compulsive). For most of us, we clean our houses until they are clean
enough, reaching a kind of equilibrium between effort and benefit. It is this cost-
benefits analysis that is at the heart of satisficing (Simon was also a respected
economist).”
Levitin      “ organized mind “

During the second half of the 1980s , computers were sold by a few companies and prices were chaotic . Even my department bought an Uptron machine and paid 5 lakhs rupees , there was a complaint on that purchase that I wasn't consulted. Within a year the price crashed to 2 lakhs rupees. Several others including KGCC bought computers at inflated prices . Super brain- an eight bits computer - was sold at about 7 lakhs. Many complained about this situation. Markets were opened up , demands were high and supplies were a few. So suppliers got a lot of price advantage. 
Mr PJ Naik met me at this time in 1984 85 and we discussed this situation . We anticipated the purchases by government units would go up  . So we decided to set up a technical advisory panel for the government of Karnataka. I played a crucial part. The panel was chaired by the additional chief secretary. At that time, there was only one ACS , a very powerful post in the government.  Now there are many ACS level officers. 
The panel decided to set up a subcommittee to workout the details . I became the chair and KGCC director became the member secretary. The government removed the corrupt director and appointed an IPS officer to that post. 
I held that position for about 20 years. It was a long and very fruitful and happening association with the government of Karnataka for me. This opened a new door for me and gave me a lot of opportunities to help in the computer absorption in the state and country in government departments, engineering colleges , universities and organizations. I also got involved in application software development in many organizations. All these activities continued for more than three decades. I feel happy with my activities these three plus decades till now. 
Before I discuss my role in the government and its impacts, let me look back at the developments in the computer market in India in the eighties and nineties in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
02/08/24, 3:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 434
“In the old days, the captain was king. His commands were not to be doubted. If a copilot suspected an oversight, he wouldn’t have dared to address it out of respect for—or fear of—his captain. Since this behavior was discovered, nearly every airline has instituted crew resource management (CRM), which coaches pilots and their crews to discuss any reservations they have openly and quickly. In other words: They carefully deprogram the authority bias. CRM has contributed more to flight safety in the past twenty years than have any technical advances.” 
Rolf Dobelli     the art of thinking clearly.

Let me get back to my discussions on the evolving Indian computer manufacturing scene from  the mid eighties onwards. 
Once the IBM PC was available, as I said earlier, many companies in India started manufacturing them.  The Intel and Motorola processors became bigger in size, capacity , speed and capabilities by following the path led by mainframes in the sixties and seventies and by introducing separate arithmetic processors, by pipelining techniques, by bringing in segmentation, paging and virtual memory etc. Both bus and ports became common attachments . Many devices can now be attached to a PC. Drivers were written and burnt into a ROM . So it was easy to use printers , terminals , and other external devices. Slowly hard disks of higher capacities , smaller physical sizes and compatible with PCs became available in the market. Insertable  floppy disks appeared . Floppy drives were part of a standard PC.  Plug and play was understood . 
The differences in the design approaches  between mainframes and PCs were
Mainframes concentrated on building a complex working system with better performances. They used discrete devices. PCs used packaged VLSI components . So the design was simpler. 
Mainframes had a complex design and circuitry. These were taken over by chip manufacturers. So integrators focused on user requirements. Management was easy and developments got distributed amongst many small companies  . The startup culture began. Monolith and big companies like IBMlost this game . 
Mainframes used many devices like magnetic tapes , disks, card readers etc . PCs were simpler. Devices were attached to the processor  through buses and ports. Input of programs and data was made simpler in PCs.  
Mainframe OS were complex multi user , multifunctional systems. Fortunately PCs started with a simple primitive OS and over a period of time , made it complex. 
The main advantages of a PC are its low costs, low power requirements, and its operational flexibility - like temperature tolerance, dust and humidity tolerance, space requirements etc. 
A lot of associated developments like motherboard, power supply , buses, ports, ethernet etc were happening very fast with many researchers and innovators working on them in an open ended manner. Standards and interoperability were evolving. So you can use third party units easily in a PC.  
PCs can be tailored for a stand alone application and were built for a single user usage. But their capabilities were limited. 
Intel came with an integrated platform called a motherboard. So in addition to the standard manufacturing companies which supplied branded PCs , many local assemblers came into the supply scene. They can easily assemble a PC and sell it at a lower price. 
But their access to space parts  was poor. They sometimes will sell and disappear leading to the term fly by night operations. 
Let us look at the evolution of servers in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
03/08/24, 5:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: _________________<________
Post 435
“Happiness is not how many things you do, but how well you do them.

More is not better. Happiness is not experiencing something else; it’s continually experiencing what you already have in new and different ways. Unfortunately as we’re taught that passion should drive our every thought move and decision, we’re basically impaled with the fear that we’re unhappy because we’re not doing “enough.””
Brianna Wiest  

The later versions of microprocessors  had multi user capabilities built in the hardware . Interrupt processing was faster. They had a larger word length of 32 bits and large memory. PCs came with an attached hard disk - hence the name DOS- disk operating system. Ethernet allowed the connectivity of many PCs. So networking was possible. All these developments led to a design of multi user,  multi programming server. Fortunately Unix was available and can be ported on these higher end PCs like Intel 486/ pentium  processors or Motorola 68020/30 processors. Unix was designed as the first open ended OS suitable for minis.
So if a higher end microprocessor 
can have a Unix operating system instead of a MS DOS,  it can act like a server. It can connect many low end PCs for use by several users with higher capabilities. It was ideal for many beginner students to learn programming. It was still inexpensive. So a market existed.
But the question was who will port Unix in the higher end PCs in our companies like HCL  ,Wipro,  PSI etc,? All these companies had excellent hardware designers like Raman in HCL, Sridhar Mitta in Wipro and Ravi and Vinay in PSI. But they weren't interested in software. So the porting of unix on their PC s was done by a group of iisc alumni engineers - Mahesh Jain, Gopi and Ravi - who later started a very successful company called Integra micro systems in bangalore. The company is still operational and it is doing a lot of innovative developments. It is the front runner in fintech. I am still associated with this company. So with the successful incorporation of Unix,  servers became popular in the country.  
So now that PC s and servers were available at affordable prices, hundreds and thousands or organizations and institutions installed them. It reached schools only by mid nineties and homes later. 
So I had a lot of work on hand during these two to three decades in helping many organizations and institutions to choose and purchase computers. Later I assisted them to establish LANs and WANs. 
These servers allowed for people to develop utilities and application software. So most organizations moved away from COBOL to C language. This led to large scale unemployment of COBOL programmers. But banks totally ignorant of these developments moved to COBOL  training and writing cobol programs on mini computers like Digital's VAX or datageneral machines. 
Many large organizations used cobol including many software companies. They weren't aware of these developments and their impact. The IT companies woke up to these realities  only by the mid to late nineties.  
So we saw a lot of parallel developments in software and hardware. Networking also improved. 
Greetings 
Dks
04/08/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 436
“As children, routine gives us a feeling of safety. As adults, it gives us a feeling of purpose. Interestingly enough, those two feelings are more similar than you’d think (at least, their origin is the same). It’s the same thing as the fear of the unknown: As children, we don’t know which way is left, let alone why we’re alive or whether or not a particular activity we’ve never done before is going to be scary or harmful. When we’re adults engaging with routine-ness, we can comfort ourselves with the simple idea of “I know how to do this, I’ve done it before.”
 You feel content because routine consistently reaffirms a decision you already made.
If said decision is that you want to write a book—and you commit to doing three pages each night for however long it takes to complete it—you affirm not only your choice to begin, but your ability to do it. It’s honestly the healthiest way to feel validated.”
Brianna Wiest 

Till mid eighties,  most software companies resisted databases due to their perceptions on performance reductions by database compared to processing with files. files. The main reason was the then existing two commercial systems ,both based on hierarchical and network models, were inefficient. Kindly recall our performance issues with dec10 for our accounting system. My students converted the accounting system into a file based application. This reduced both connect time and cpu time by orders of magnitude. So the fear of loss of performance  by  the software companies  like TCS was realistic.
Though EF Codd developed the total concept and details of relational database in 1970 itself in a classic paper and system R was built by IBM  in the  mid seventies,  commercial relational systems were slow in coming to the market . Actually, I got my student to build a basic relational system and build an application for agricultural data on top of the base unit in 1979. We found it easy to build a relational database system and found it doing transactions faster.
 Again it was Unix that gave the lead with unibase- a relational database system  , which was not enterprise scalable. By the late eighties , Oracle came up with a good enterprise level relational database system and that changed the scene. After the arrival of oracle database systems , all software developments were based on a database and not on file systems. Even the earlier developed applications were ported to databases. But it was not a rosy path. Indian airlines faced problems when they automated passenger check in. Modifications were needed. 
Let me start listing the streams in innovation and disruptive developments in the time period of 1984 to 1994.  
 There were multiple parallel streams of developer activities going on in multiple directions by many organizations . 
One stream continued with processor development - Intel is the main one here. From mid nineties  , Asic  based chip development became a major business with hundreds to thousands of applications. The Asic chip foundries overtook processor foundries. India did a half hearted effort in this by setting up the semiconductor industry in chandigarh.
It was called semiconductor complex and was set up in Chandigarh in 1984 . Prof Ramanathan from TIFR put in alot of effort to start research and manufacturing and this plant is a part of his effort. The semiconductor research in india started in a small way in the late seventies in a few institutions likeTIFR,  IISc, IIT Kharagpur etc but didn't build up . It literally died . 
The government sent a team to England to learn about the semiconductor industry, particularly the processor foundries and applications , and in specific their applications in schools. The team also supported the setting up of the SCL in India.  That plus free land offer  from the Punjab government helped in setting up the factory in Chandigarh, a big mistake . Because the city had no electronics culture , whereas Bangalore had an electronics culture for several decades. Ramanathan was unhappy with the location.  While the world  was producing 16 bits processors and going to 32 bits, India got a discarded 8bits processor technology and set up SCL. Unfortunately , there were no downstream activities and hence no demand for their product. There was a fire in 1989 and that was the end of the Indian dream of manufacturing processors. 
Indian computer industry's path was decided by a few bureaucrats in the ministry of Electronics mostly and by NIC - under Dr Seshagiri in the Ministry of Planning. Both these guided correctly the development of applications for government departments , but miserably failed in all other directions. They were unaware of the developments in microprocessors and accessories and servers and their impacts on many sectors. While the world is reaping  the benefits of developments by thousands of young innovators who were setting up and  collaborating with a large number of private industries,  we were governed by the myopic licensing policies of the government, a large distrust about the private sector and a fixed set of beliefs and attitudes by NIC. Prof Nag was removed from the secretary's position because he didn't get enough license funds. He was a liberal man. The change in the government from Indira Gandhi to Rajiv Gandhi made the power go to bureaucrats  from scientists and engineers in many ministries. That was another delaying process in the development of computer based activities in our country. 
Rajiv Gandhi even took a printer from India while on a visit to the US. When it wasn't working, a technician from NIC flew into the US to operationalise the printer.
Greetings 
Dks
05/08/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 437
“You can see there, Mrita Sanjivani (capable of restoring the dead to life), Vishalyakarani (capable of extracting weapons and healing all wounds inflicted by weapons), Suvarnakarani (restoring the body to its original complexion) and Sandhani, the great herb (capable of joining severed limbs or fractured bone.”
Jambhavan to Hanuman about four herbs to bring everyone back to life. 
Ramayana - yuddha kanda sarga 74 

The second stream of developmental activities in computers  was building or as we say ,manufacturing the computers based on the processor chips from Intel and Motorola and also to some extent Zilog . PSI in bangalore popularized microcontroller usage in india and built systems using zilog processors. Manufacturing  effort was picked up faster in India and many started in this business. 
As I said , these companies moved into the server business also. This combination helped a lot. It moved the country from Basic language programming to C programming. The use of the Unix operating system helped in promoting the use of C. So engineering colleges moved to C and discarded Fortran over a period of about ten years. But there were diehard Microsoft supporters who resisted Unix.  But they were in a minority. 
These efforts by many manufacturing units and a big group of services industries helped us to spread the computer culture across a large number of institutions, organizations,  industries and government departments.  The significant impact was in the field of computer education in most engineering colleges and the popularity of C. Training institutions also helped in the production of skilled programmers.  
We ,in our department, didn't use Fortran. My students used an assembly language initially and Pascal followed by C. We moved to pascal language by 1976 and moved to C by 1982. The transition was smooth. C survived and survives even now  despite other languages like Java and python emerging over the years. 
These developments moved India into the manufacturing domain from the trading domain. It made the computer based industry a major sector in India. 
It led to computer based job creations . The number of new jobs needed went on increasing every year ,  reaching very high levels of growth in the first two decades of the 21st century. 
Greetings
Dks
06/08/24, 5:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 438
“In a new job situation, we are ignorant of the power relationships between people, the psychology of our boss, the rules and procedures that are considered critical for success.
Although we might enter these situations with excitement about what we can learn or do with our new skills, we quickly realize how much hard work there is ahead of us. The great danger is that we give in to feelings of boredom, impatience, fear, and confusion. We stop observing and learning. The process comes to a halt.
If, on the other hand, we manage these emotions and allow time to take its course, something remarkable begins to take shape. As we continue to observe and follow the lead of others, we gain clarity, learning the rules and seeing how things work and fit together. If we keep practicing, we gain fluency; basic skills are mastered, allowing us to take on newer and more exciting challenges. We begin to see connections that were invisible to us before. We slowly gain confidence in our ability to solve problems or overcome weaknesses through sheer persistence.”
Greene      Mastery


The third stream was using microprocessors in various sectors. This happened very slowly over many years . The availability of a large number of affordable PCs opened a new era of generic application software production. It started slowly with IT literate people developing medium level complex  programs with thousands of lines of code. Initially programmers focused on writing a program to solve a well defined problem like say load flow program for power systems. So the focus of a programmer was only on the need to meet the functional requirements completely and correctly. If you meet all these requirements, your program becomes dependable and it can be run several   times. Such programs are called production programs . Programming moved from the experimental to production phase.  It needed to be modified whenever user requirements change. The best example of this was a payroll program for a company or organization.  Pay of a person is based on company rules and they may change. So the program has to be changed periodically and tested effectively. That was known as maintenance work. Most software companies worked in this area. They needed to know the computers ,programming and functions. 
When  we moved into the PC era, these forms of program development developed individually for  each organization became expensive and needed many skilled persons. Retention was not easy. Initially each organization wanted an exclusive program built for it. Later, due to innovations, many generic programming concepts evolved. System and processor environments were standard and generic. 
Performance became an important criterion. Now the user should be able to run the program himself without the physical presence of the developer. Programs should meet the different kinds of requirements of different users. So parametric programming emerged. Programming became an engineering activity, called or known as software engineering.  User requirements became important. Now maintenance became a centralised activity to be done by the developer. 
This created another startup structure  called software products development companies. This led to outsourcing software services also. There are organizations who don't want any software engineer or infra . They outsourced payroll preparation to a reliable, trust worthy third party company. So many small companies came up in cities like Bangalore.  Slowly small companies with a few people developed applications and sold them. Initially the focus was on office work like typing, filing, sorting and grouping, searching, petty cash maintenance, lists creation etc. Then it moved to payroll , purchase and store ,payment tracking , exam results processing etc. While some software targeted PCs , many focused on servers. 

 So there were great demands of computerised applications - automation of admin and finance functions-  in many countries. This led to globalization of software production , maintenance and usage. This also meant a large demand for programmers.  That created a  major , global employment producing industry . That is the start of today's big IT sector. 
In conclusion, we can see that these developments have  led to the following categorization of organizations. 
Those who don't computerize their activities.
Those who built their applications in house totally. 
Those who had an in-house computer centre and necessary  programming and operating staff but outsourced software development and maintenance.
Those who had in-house computer facilities and bought generic application software packages for admin and finance. 
Those who outsourced computerised functions of admin and finance to a third party but performed in an in-house computer facility
Total outsourcing to a third party
Those where Computers were  used for design and process control.
Those where Computers were used for production. 
Greetings
Dks
07/08/24, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 439
“Even in the privacy of our own minds—when we’re mentally grappling with problems or trying to work through difficult decisions—we’re apt to worry, stew, or gripe about something (or avoid thinking about it altogether). What we should be doing is asking ourselves questions that can help break down the problem or get to the crux of it. But we may be unsure of how to formulate those questions. And we may fear not having the answers to them.
Warren Berger   


These three streams of computer based developments  impacted our life in several ways - personally, professionally , socially , and also employment related and production related. Awareness of computers was low in the beginning of the eighties. A lot of ignorance also existed amongst those who want to use computers, even amongst academics and computer based professionals as most were familiar with and attached to the concept of mainframes, computer centres , Fortran and cobol programming and were unaware of PCs , servers , and third party generic applications. The computer professionals didn't know which way to go - mainframe and computer centre route or servers and PCs route. The mainframe route was mature and the server route was evolving. Even if they chose the server route , they don't know what to buy and how to configure hardware . I had seen hundreds of doubts lingering with most computer professionals. Wrong choices were common. Initially most servers had unix as the operating systems. Later after almost a decade after servers appeared in the market, Microsoft came up with Windows NT for multi user operations to compete with Unix.  But it wasn't good from security point of view. Unix is secure even now . It has proven its security credentials to a large extent. So the confusion over selections persisted for several decades and exists even now to some extent. 
Most people who showed interest in computers thought that it is for computer specialists to build applications. They had no interest or role in it. They kept away from the development of applications. They didn't learn about computers. Computer engineers built a superiority complex and outlook and refused to understand the domain for which they built applications or the usage / user requirements. Metaphorically we look at the situation like -  they built a set of shoes and suggested to users to cut their feet to fit the shoes, not the other way about - build a fit and usable pair of shoes. This led to failures and mistrust. This failure is a classic constant feature of computerization. 
Failures started with mainframe applications , increased with generic server level applications and continued with the  later developed  ERP software . This happened till the end of 20 th century. 
With higher levels of responsibility and financial risks, developers and innovators changed their attitude and agreed that user is the reason for the software , not just the functions. They abandoned their older mindsets and perceptions about software development and hence we got better and highly usable products . So these failures have reduced considerably now. The situation is much better. 
But let us not relax. We still have many problems for professionals to handle with the onset of cloud, IOT, GPUs, VR, AR, smart mobiles, and AI. The problems of integration due to the use of many technologies, architecting, customization , and operationalization gave us a lot of  opportunities for a new breed of architects , consultants , builders , operational engineers, maintenance and troubleshooting experts. So life is going to be exciting with lots of jobs and new ways of living .
 So open up and see these vistas of the future , be prepared, accept them , build new systems and adapt to the future.
Indians are good at learning and adapting and using  many new technologies. So I hope Indians will lead the world in adapting technologies in new sectors like agriculture, MSME, health, education, societal problems, governance etc. 
Greetings
Dks
08/08/24, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 440
“If fear is the first enemy of questioning, running a close second is knowledge. The more you know, the less you feel the need to ask. But the problem here is twofold. First, we can easily fall into the “trap of expertise,” wherein knowledgeable people begin to rely too much on what they already know and fail to keep expanding upon and updating that knowledge. This is particularly perilous in times of rapid change. And there’s another problem with depending too much on our existing knowledge: To put it bluntly, we don’t know as much as we think we do.”
Warren Berger. 

I came to the conclusion ,at the beginning of the server and application software evolution itself ,that many organizations need professional help and advice in moving into this new computerization era. I was sure that my knowledge of computers extensively both on hardware and software and my close knowledge of the market and its movements could be put to use to help many organizations. Many academics didn't have similar exposure to IT engineering. It was ignored by them. Some made mistakes in the decisions. 
 That decided my journey in the next three decades. This was in addition to my teaching and research - my primary duty and others are extra activities. That was a second commitment of mine to increase the computer culture. My first  commitment was to help engineering colleges by teaching CS courses and lectures. Both ran in parallel. 

Let me look at our activities with the Technical advisory panel of the Government of Karnataka.  I was a leading  member for more than 20 years and also chair of the subcommittee during this period. So a lot of actions took place during this period. My description of the three streams happened during this period. In addition we saw networking also. 
Let us look at different aspects and changes that took place during this time. 


I interacted with several  directors of KGCC . I remember the names of most of them .
Sharad Saxena IPS was one of the earliest. My association with him lasted for decades even after he left KGCC.  After he became the MD of Keonics, he made me a director. Then we had a few more directors followed by Mr Shantappa , MN Reddy IPS, and Mr Vijayakumar, IAS. We also had a very active director in Mr MN Reddy after Mr Shantappa  . He had a short tenure, but a very effective period when we could streamline the activities. My association with him lasted for many years even after he left KGCC. He helped me on several occasions. He was a great friend. 
My last director of KGCC  was Ramana Reddy. We worked together very well and did many things including setting up a LAN for vidhana soudha.
After him KGCC was merged with the newly created egovernance department with Rajiv Chawla as its secretary. 
Let me look at  the problems we faced with respect to computerization in the government departments.  
Approval for computer purchases based on their applications and needs. This may be purchase of a few PCs to a large system say for the commercial taxes department. 
Suggestion of architecture , configurations, specifications, application software , etc
purchase of  of PCs and servers and application software packages by government departments. 
Decide on the companies Who  manufacture standard  and good quality of PCs , printers, servers, scanners , word processors, etc
Decide on the prices for theses items - produce rate contracts and approve them 
Selection of computers for CMs office during Ramakrishna Hegde’s regime as CM.
Approvals for special requirements like the systems for CET cell when it started. 
Handholding with departments
Handling supply, installation and maintenance problems. 
Introduction of new technology developments like LAN, WAN, Oracle,  etc. 
Suggest and approve software developments like admissions, exam processing , 
Coordination with NIC karnataka Centre, 
Coordination with software developed by departments.  
Training
Restructuring KGCC
Support to major programs of the government like Mahithisindhu undertaken during Mr Krishnas's CM period - 1000 schools computerization 
 Rejection of postfacto  approval for orders to classic computers. 

I encountered many situations and helped in many reforms like rate contract, standardisation, propagation of kannada software, vendor selection, price discovery, two part evaluation - technical and commercial, configuration approaches, etc. 
Greetings.
Dks
09/08/24, 4:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 441
“In terms of biases, some of them are hardwired in us; others may be based on our own limited experiences. But in either case, if we are predisposed to think something, we may be less open to considering questions that challenge that view.
we also must contend with hubris—which can lead us to believe our biases are correct or are not biases at all. (“Everyone else is biased!”) The relationship between humility and questioning is interesting—if you lack the former, you’ll probably do less of the latter. You may be more inclined to think and say things like: “If I don’t know it already, it can’t be that important,” or “I just go with my gut instincts—they’re usually right,” or “I don’t have to sit through intelligence briefings because I’m a really smart guy.”
Warren Berger  

Let me go back to 1985 and talk about my activities. I continued with CSI and we conducted a science and engineering conference, the inaugural national conference sponsored by CSI. Prof. Sashisekaran's work on cancer research was one of the highlights of this conference. 
After we conducted the International conference on knowledge representation in Samskritam in Sankara Mutt , Chamrajpet , we decided to conduct a workshop on Vedic mathematics with Prof Bhanumurthy as the main speaker with his book as a focus. We got Mr Veerappa Moily , Minister for Education to inaugurate the workshop and Dr Vidya Sagar, Director , CAIR, to deliver the keynote. It was a successful activity. 
During my chair of CSI, Prof Ramaseshan invited Prof Nag, director ,IIT Bombay and Gen A Balasubramanian for a review of our work. So we decided to felicitate them on behalf of CSI.  It was scheduled on oct 31th , 1984. In the morning, Mr Venugopalachar , joint secretary of CSI, came and met me. He said that Mrs Gandhi was assassinated. So we canceled the meeting. I informed both the members of the review committee. They were shocked and made arrangements for return. The country went into a chaotic situation for days. It was a very bad time. Many felt upset and sad. 
I became the chair of the computer engineering division of the institution of engineers.  It meant a lot of travels - one per month. Add this to my travels for CSI meetings and then add to that my travels for lectures .  I also traveled to Sirsi for CES work and I traveled for NSS camps across karnataka. It was crazy.  I took my family to Simla for one meeting of the computer board. 

At the institute's end, I was busy with my research on transactions processing, concurrency control and energy systems. I was busy with energy survey work at CES . I chaired CSA’s research interview committee and looked at selection and not rejection. We selected 34 research candidates in a year - a big record for the department.
Greetings 
Dks
10/08/24, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 442
“We are moving from an economy and a society built on the logical, linear, computerlike capabilities of the Information Age to an economy and a society built on the inventive, empathic, big-picture capabilities of what’s rising in its place, the Conceptual Age.” Daniel Pink.    “ A whole new mind”

I discussed in my previous posts about   the developments of PCs and servers and their impact in detail. Let us see how I used them in my lab. 
I used these developments to build my infrastructure in the department. 
In 1982, I wanted to set up a PCs lab in the department.  I met with strong opposition. Most said it won't be useful. I didn't find a single supporter. The divisional chair , Prof G Krishna and department chair opposed it in addition to most professors. 
I devised an alternate route. Fortunately I was still in charge of the hybrid computer facility. So I talked to the purchase officer and deputy finance controller and got their approval to get the PCs as assembled ones. They agreed that it won't be treated as equipment. I can't buy equipment with my hybrid computer budget. So I could get three PCs with this approach. My excellent rapport with admin and finance helped me in getting the PCs despite opposition in the department.  
Then , I decided to write off the pdp 11 and the obsolete analog computer . I went through an additional process of getting a committee of faculty appointed and got a recommendation from the committee.  Then I wrote to our  admin. They appointed Dr M P Srinivasan from ISU . He is a good friend of mine. It didn't matter. He came, looked at the report, saw the computer and agreed for the write off. He gave a letter to that effect. So the institute permitted me to write off the facility and buy another system. 
So I looked at the market and decided on a HCL Horizon 3 computer with Motorola 68030 with a provision to upgrade it to M68040 within a year. It had Unix as the operating system. Since the cost was low, I had extra budget available and decided to buy three more PCs from HCL along with the Horizon machine and connect all my PCs to the system. I got the purchase approved by a department committee though not required as per IISc rules. So I now had a full-fledged client server system , one of the first in the country. I got good  support from my lab assistant Ganga Raju. 
We put the new computer system for use by our BE  and ME students. It was very useful. 

Two events happened after this. 
One an anonymous letter was sent to the chair stating that the write off of the hybrid computer was not done properly.  It was written by an internal person or faculty in the department.  Most of us know that handwriting. I explained the procedures and the matter was closed. That person wrote a few more in subsequent years about others activities. The department ignored his letters. 
The second event was to do with HCL and Horizon. Based on my purchase, about six repeat orders went from other departments. The director of technical education was visiting me. He was buying computers. I told him about the Horizon machine. Immediately, he took my landline phone , called his concerned officer and told him to place orders for six Horizon machines. HCLs finances became better with this spate of orders. They marched ahead of Wipro and PSI.  So Mr Anil Bhisht of HCL was happy. 
This system worked for about a decade. 
Before all these, I got a PC with Intel 286  assembled for my office use. We had an email system working in the institute with ernet becoming operational. So I used the PC for typing and sending mails . 
Greetings
Dks
11/08/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 443
“The last enemy of questioning is time (or the supposed lack of it). We just don’t seem to make time for questioning—starting in school. Ask any teacher about this; there is so much material to “download” that little time remains for student questions. And time is an even bigger source of pressure on adult questioning. “
Warren Berger 

I shifted into a ground floor flat E 07 in the institute quarters. It was opposite to my old quarters E 20. This flat had a garage attached to it. It has a lot of open space in the front and back for gardening. I had many good friends as  neighbors - Professors Venkatesan,RS  Naidu, SSK ,SK  Rangarajan ,  Dr BS Subbarao etc. My children liked the atmosphere very well. They had many friends . So life was good. 
Since I had a garage , I booked a Maruti van. Unfortunately I booked a high van. A van of Prof SN Rao turned turtle on the highway six months after I booked my van  . Further , the fan was at the bottom of the van and it collected all the muck from the road. After I got the allotment, I didn't want to take delivery. Mr Thimme Gowda’s friend wanted the car. So I passed on the allotment to him. He became a good friend of mine. He helped me in buying a wall clock. That stayed with us till recently. 
Later, I decided to book a FIAT car. It was called Premier Padmini. I booked with Sundaram motors and got it within six months. Institute gave me a loan for the purchase of a car. 
I also started learning to drive with Mani motors. I got the driving license also without any difficulty in the first attempt itself . 
But unfortunately when I and Thimme Gowda brought the car home, I hit another car and the new car had some damages. So it was sent for repairs. 
Kodandapani who was working in ASTRA as a driver started teaching me to drive the car after it came back from the workshop. I went on long drives in many streets in the evening for a few weeks till I had full confidence. Whenever we had to go on a longer travel to  other cities, he used to drive the car. 

I became responsible for computer purchases by KSCST.  Mr D R Ramesh used to get my approvals for all computer purchases. This continued for decades. 
Greetings 
Dks
12/08/24, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 444
“As our lives move faster and have become more complicated little time is allotted for inquiry, contemplation, or critical thinking. We’re under pressure to make quick decisions and render snap judgments, and to do, do, do—without necessarily asking why we’re doing what we’re doing or whether we should be doing it at all.
The paradox is that in the rush to do more with our limited time, we may end up using that time less efficiently—because rushed decisions and actions can send us down the wrong path.”
Warren Berger 

Mr Mathew Chacko , CEO of two companies PrecisionIT and Legend systems, both located in Chennai , has commented on my activities With TAP . 
“Fabulous, Sir. Lots of learning. Feel I should have done more .
At an appropriate time, please talk about work, family life balance, and how you managed it.”
My response 
Thanks. I am happy that some of you  find my posts useful. 
As regards work life balance, I plead guilty. For me ,it is more work and less family life. It does not mean that I ignored my responsibilities. I was there in all important events in my family like :
Handling sickness of my children, selection and admissions to schools , colleges and universities for my children, being the president of PTA, getting books and other requirements for their education,  visiting them regularly when they were studying in Bombay , Mysore and Surathkal, as well as in US, support to their visa trips to chennai, creating awareness in them, getting toys and  books for them, shifting houses several times - more than 9 times before retirement and five times after retirement,  constructing my house, buying flats later on, managing my finances and providing financial support to the family, conducting marriages of my children, handling most of the major logistics for the house etc. 
I helped several people in getting jobs or school or college admissions. I advised a large number of my friends and acquaintances. So my friend circle is big and expanding and many helped me also. I have counseled a large number of kids and students. 
My regrets:
I didn't spend a lot of time talking to my children. I didn't spend time on routine activities like grocery purchases, but took care of major purchases like furniture, refrigerator, washing machine, TV etc. My biggest regret is that I couldn't visit my relatives, attend functions like marriages, house warming, 60th birthdays etc. I lost touch with most . I couldn't give good directions to  nephews and nieces. 

My overall take on balance is :
But if I didn't do all the professional activities, I am sure I would have had only this amount of family activities. I wouldn't have done anything more than this. I am a lazy person. Remember that  I wasn't a healthy person . I have many health problems like diabetes and angina. Without all these academic and professional activities, I would be terribly bored and unhappy. These gave me immense satisfaction. 
I am happy and very satisfied with the way I lived my life. As I keep saying , the following helped me. 
1.Excellent time management.  I said I am a lazy person, but I put a lot of mindfulness and effort to complete tasks. I needed to think, attend presentations  and write a lot and managed it. Even during travels whether long distance or within the city or while waiting at places, i had the habit of writing. It was a great practice- thinking most of the time and writing. Add my very good reading habits , it made my life great. I didn't ignore my walking. 
I was regular with my visits to our health centre and with medicines. Though I am not a ritualistic person, I had faith in goodness ,in friends and the world in general - positive optimism. 
2.Regularity in my life. I didn't postpone many activities. I was very regular with my food, walking, sleeping ,  reading and writing. Not impulsive. I had good and regular habits and loved frugality and conservation. 
3. I wasn't afraid of new developments. I spent time and effort to acquire new skills. My open mind helped me in forecasting and absorbing new technologies. 
4.I maintained good energy levels and a sharp mind but not calm . 
Greetings 
Dks
13/08/24, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 445
“103.Wise disciples should never utter what is not completely true or speak 
discourteously or with disrespect in front of the guru.
104. Those who speak to the guru with egoism or anger, or engage in arguments with 
the guru, will lose what wisdom they have gained. They will be reborn in a waterless 
land with no interest in the highest Truth, or as spirits who oppose the Truth or, who 
are adversaries of humanity.”
Guru Gita 

Let me continue from where I left in the previous post on work family balance. Actually , this balance depends on certain basic factors and I want to discuss that. 
Qn.1 is living a mundane , mechanical process of a few well set routine activities of earning , eating , sleeping ? 
I decided  at an early age of 8 years itself that 
I don't want that routine, monotonous ,boring , mechanical life. My life should be meaningful and should have some purposes.
2. Why did I feel that life should have a meaning and purpose at that very young age? 
It is the ambience in which I grew up and the mentoring I got from my uncle. I tagged on to him, observed   his behavior and actions very closely. I assisted him wherever possible and whatever i can do. He is not given to gossiping. He didn't exhibit any  petty behaviour or jealousy . He helped a lot of people. He used to draft a lot of legal documents for many . He conducted Sri Rama Navami every year with meticulous planning, good accounting, good documentation, transparency, and integrity. These made a deep impression on me and I felt that I should follow his lead and ideals. 
This made me to understand that life is not just eating and sleeping . There is a lot more to life. Sadly most people don't know this simple fact. They struggle through their life to make enough money to eat and reside and sleep. 
I was convinced after listening to Upanishads that life has a greater purpose than mere survival.
3. How did I want to live?
First, I want certain qualities and principles in my life. 
I wanted scholarship , because I saw many  scholars in the family and outside. I wasn't happy with school education. It was really elementary. So I realised that real education comes by observation of the society and the country. So the components needed for Scholarship are
1.Good observation and analysis
2.Open and flexible mind 
3.Reading 
4.Listening to scholars and others and look for true statements
5.Questioning and looking for 360 °views.

I had some principles in life  - mostly simple and flexible ones. Let me list them
Help others and society as far as possible. provide knowledge to others. 
Trust friends. Don't judge your friends and family.
Lead a simple frugal life.
Money is not everything. Do a good financial Plan. Restrict expenditures. Conserve resources. 
Be honest, truthful and Ethical. 
Don't harm others. 
Have goals in life . 
Constant improvement is needed
Give freedom to the family to make decisions. Don't force the children on the selection of their higher education or spouse. Discuss and leave the final decisions to them. 
Bringing up children is a very important task. It is not an easy job, it needs a delicate balance between strictness and lenience. Realize that  they don't accept your views. Give them independence but not total freedom when they are young. Teach good habits . 

Those are my views of actions needed - a good balance between family, profession, public life and social service. 
Greetings
Dks
14/08/24, 5:16 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 446

“What is it that a true human should trust in?
We should give our trust to our unfolding path in life, which presents itself to us once we learn how to let go. This is both the simplest and most difficult of principles.
What stops a person from letting go and embracing trust in the unfoldment of the universe in their life is the interventions of the intellect. All those who walk the path of Tao will at some point or another realize that it is the machinations of their own minds that are preventing them from attaining the heightened states of consciousness alluded to by the ancient wisdom traditions.”
Mitchell  


There are some comments:

Sunil Mohan , PNB , writes
“Sir Good Morning, I have been reading all your posts daily very religiously. And feel blessed with knowledge in all aspects of life not just technology. Today’s post is very relevant in present state of affairs in our country and also across world. Unfortunately, no one is talking about values, principles, ethics etc. we need to have a true statesman to drastically influence the system in a positive direction. 
Hope to get more such insightful guidance. Will definitely try to do my bit positively for society. “

Mathew Chacko writes
“Excellent, Sir. You are providing new and creative ways of looking at every situation. Thanks for sharing “

Mukul Jain writes 
“Thanks for sharing your experiences Dr. Dks. I have been reading all your posts. I am amazed to know your deep  involvement in the development of computer related activities at different levels despite so many hurdles. You are really an unsung hero. I can see in your posts, the amount of satisfaction you derived by promoting the computer science and related activities. Really great. Wish you all the best. Regards.”

Thanks to all of you. Thanks to others who are reading my posts.
I had the support of all my friends. I couldn't have done many activities except with all people’s support, understanding and encouragement. I got support not only from my friends but also from the bosses of all organizations , institutions , government departments and banks where I worked. This reminds of PauloCoelho's quote “ the whole  world helps you to realise your dreams. “
Most of my life I had to select goals, and new paths leading to more satisfaction. I had support and help from a lot of people . So in addition to a strong inner self awareness and assessment, I listened to the society. Society helps us for becoming happy and successful. It does not conspire to destroy us. Let us be positive and have good thoughts. Good will happen. 
Greetings
Dks
15/08/24, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 447
“The nature of Tao is to flow and let life unfold in a harmonious manner. Those who can tap into this flow will be led toward a state of conscious elevation; those who cannot will generally be led down a path of trivial concerns. “
Jason Gregory.   Effortless living. 

There is a new comment from my cousin Mrs Rajalakshmi Lokanathan:
“There is a woman behind every man . You should thank your wife for hercooperation.”

My response
I wanted to give a short response ,but I decided to give a meaningful response. 
Thanks for your very keen interest in my posts from the beginning with a remarkable consistency of interest like my other cousins, Mrs Subha Ravi, Mrs Meena Muralidharan and Mr Murali venkatasubramanian.  
I agree with your comment . But I got support from many women and men. The first was my grandmother who brought me up till I was 11 years old and continued supporting me afterwards also. I admire her courage in staying alone , in handling her day to day financial activities in traveling throughout the country upto Badrinath and cooking her food everywhere and her nourishing me during a long typhoid illness of about two months when I was in 10th standard . I learnt a lot from her - courage and freedom from fear, independence , regular habits . During that period , my total world was around my uncle - S Narayana Sarma.  I learnt a lot from him - scholarship, spirituality, simplicity, frugal living, honesty, accounting and ledgers, transparency , helping tendency and involvement in community affairs. That literally provided foundation for me and my life was built on it. 
When I was taken by my uncle to Tirunelveli to study from 6th to 10th - a period of five years, I saw a different ambience and environment. Learning became the most dominant activity. I learnt about many vegetables like beans, cabbage ,potatoes etc. 
It should be surprising to many when I say that my aunt was a great reader. Most women of her age only read Ramayana or some slokas. But she was different. My uncle will bring three novels every week for her. It happened during the entire period of my stay. Her social awareness was high. So I also started reading , a habit of regularly reading two to three books every week . It continued throughout my life, even now. That is a great habit I picked from her. She was also involved with community work particularly taking care of the temple. She was very generous , helped many ladies in the neighborhood. She also introduced me to cinema . 
When we moved to Palayamkottai, a town close to Tirunelveli for my PUC, Ramanathan uncle , brother of my Tirunelveli aunt , helped us in finding a house and lending me a lot of English novels. 
When I moved to my younger uncle's house in Madurai to do my BE, my aunt helped me even though she wasn't well . She had a lot of interest in society, nation, governance, politics etc . We used to discuss topics related to various happenings of the day regularly. It continued much later also . She was very quick to grasp many happenings and highly intelligent. 
During my second year,  I had the support of my TVS uncle , L Narayanan and aunt a lot. Both were very helpful and generous. 

So I  acknowledge the support I received from my wife, daughter, son, parents and sister. The great support I received from my grandmother , my uncles and aunts, my teachers, my students  and many innumerable friends , and my grandsons is not trivial and cannot be ignored or pushed under a carpet . I acknowledge all help , significant support and encouragements that  I received from all these people and it is their great contributions in my life  that made me what I was and am . I am grateful to all. 
I want to make a special mention to my daughter. At a young age of five , she learnt responsibility and helped her brother. She also had and has a good grasping power. Later when we moved into the campus, she learnt independence in managing the house like eating and feeding her brother by herself in the afternoon, staying alone in the house without fear till her mother returned and doing her homework without any prodding by us. My son was also a great support. Both understood the reality of life at a young age. 
I learn a lot from my grandson Neel. His knowledge and understanding are remarkable. 
Thanks again
Greetings
Dks
16/08/24, 5:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 448
“Man is by nature a social animal; an individual who is unsocial naturally
and not accidentally is either beneath our notice or more than human.
Society is something in nature that precedes the individual. Anyone who either cannot lead the common life or is so self-sufficient as not to need to, and therefore does not partake of society, is either a beast or a god.”
Aristotle

Let me get back to my activities from 1985. 
As I had been saying,  I was moving into another- new -  path of advisory and solutions consulting activities with my involvement with TCS. At that time ,the scene was simple. But by 1984, the computer scene changed it's face. It became an integral set of activities - 
Incorporate databases into applications;
Networking both LAN and WAN;
Move to client server architecture;
Use more PCs as front end devices;
Better presentation and user interfaces ; and 
Trust in Unix and third party generic applications. 
So it became IT, no longer computer. 
It became a complex and chaotic world of great expectations, failures, and disappointments. A new science had to evolve and it  didn't happen at that time or even later, but practices started evolving . It needed a mindset overhaul - not a simple change but seeing the old giving way to a brand  new set of things-  from mainframe to IT. So I saw a big helping role for me  here. 

Let me look at my IT advisory activities which played a big role in my life for the next four decades helping governments, organizations, research institutes, schools, colleges, cooperatives, industries and banks. It was a memorable period starting from 1984 and went on till now. 
My association with the Technical advisory panel of the Government of Karnataka brought me in contact with many government organizations and many senior officers. This brought about a different kind of activity from me - computer and Software advice and support for purchases. My knowledge of rate contracts helped me in knowing the market - technical capabilities, spare parts  and prices. 
The list of organizations I helped is a long one. I was associated with some of them for several years. 
This kind of advice and support started with government departments first , followed by KSCST and many government organizations. This was followed by advises and support to  many central government organizations , and many colleges . Later in the end of the twentieth century and in the first two decades of the twenty-first century, I extended the advice to banks in a big way. 

My advice consisted of 
Policy formulations,  Architecture and identification of IT systems and components like servers, os. Networking, routers and switches, end devices, security devices and application software, databases, support infrastructure like ups, power supply, DG sets ,  etc , decision on specifications , vendor discovery, performance tests, preparation of  detailed RFPs - request for proposals-, discussions with vendors and clarifications,  vendor rating, technical and commercial evaluations, installation, standard operating procedures,  and acceptance testing. It also included selection of technical skilled persons. It took a lot of my time and the remuneration was marginal. Mindset changes were the most difficult tasks. Fortunately most CEOs listened to me and accepted my advice. That and my advice to all organizations gave me immense satisfaction. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
17/08/24, 6:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 449

“Because of our capacity to imagine, we were able to build Earth as it is today out of virtually nothing. 
 In a sense, the notion that thoughts create reality is more than just a nice idea; it’s also a fact of evolution. It was because of language and thought that we could create a world within our minds, and ultimately, it is because of language and thought that we have evolved into the society we have today—for better and for worse. 
 Almost every great master, artist, teacher, innovator, inventor, and generally happy person could attribute some similar understanding to their success.
Many of the world’s ‘best’ people understood that to change their lives, they had to change their minds.”
Brianna Wiest. 

My  many advising and consulting activities  to organizations can be categorized  as:
1.One time activity like purchase of computers, selection of faculty or computer staff or even product selection or advice on business. There are hundreds in this category. So I won't discuss this further. 
2.one process based activity which may continue for a few years. The process may be (i) setting up a computer centre including room design, UPS, furniture and staff,(ii) selection and installation of software like exam processing by universities or school boards, (iii) training to staff , (iv) ERP related advice. 
Many institutions come to my mind in this category like karnataka secondary exam board , Bangalore university, VTU, MES college, CPRI, ISEC, KREC, KSRTC , HMT,NPC, SREB, KEB, DTE, Bangalore dairy,  Karnataka  land army corporation,  ministry of shipping, RBI, APMC Gadag, JNNCE, Shimoga, .
AICTE needs a special mention. 
There are many stories and many problems here. Let us look at some of them later.
3.Multi Processes based activities - total systems approach dealing with many processes and their integration .  These are complex interrelated processes needing a holistic and current outlooks with some amount of future predictions.  One of my goals was and is - whatever system was setup by me should stay for 10 years with upgrades and work well in a smooth ,trouble free manner with good maintenance and service support. Price is not my main concern. I am not the L1 person. Again there are many organizations in this category - Central silk board, NRDMS project of DST and KSCST, Jindal Steels , Jayadeva institute of cardiology, Mysugar , Bhadravati, DTE, Indian bank, Corporation bank , PNB, Syndicate bank, IDRBT, Vijaya bank , PNB housing finance, Equitas small bank, 
All these were total solutions projects on IT.

4. Large projects
 TCS  sysgel
Department of space. COWAA
Department of secondary education , government of Karnataka- Mahiti Sindhu program
World bank funded TEQIP program.
State of environment report for Karnataka,  and world Bank scheme 
Integra micro systems- imfast, financial inclusion etc. 
Jayadeva institute of cardiology - power - substations, networking, elevators  etc. 
PWD , government of Karnataka,  - revamp of power systems design for Vidhana soudha, Vikas soudha , elevator problems in High Court, Raj Bhavan 
Karnataka power corporation - setting up the computer facility, staff selection,  investigation of the failure of a 100 MVA transformer at Sharavathi power station , investigation of Circuit breaker non operation at Raichur thermal power station etc. 
BCCL and Delhi electric supply - total redesign of distribution system
JNCASR - design and implementation of a modern power network and stations, safety audit. 

I have not included my major association with TCS and my associations with CBIP, KSCST, DEE, DST , TAP of Karnataka,  as well as my academic involvements with many colleges, universities , IIM , Bangalore,  PSTI, ISEC etc here. 
Greetings
Dks
18/08/24, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 450
“You believe that creating your best life is a matter of deciding what you want and then going after it, but in reality, you are psychologically incapable1 of being able to predict what will make you happy. 

Your brain can only perceive what it’s known, so when you choose what you want for the future, you’re actually just recreating a solution or an ideal of the past. When things don’t work out the way you want them to, you think you’ve failed only because you didn’t re-create something you perceived as desirable. In reality, you likely created something better, but foreign, and your brain misinterpreted it as “bad” because of that. (Moral of the story: Living in the moment isn’t a lofty ideal reserved for the Zen and enlightened; it’s the only way to live a life that isn’t infiltrated with illusions. It’s the only thing your brain can actually comprehend.)’”
 Brianna  Wiest 

Let me get back to my chronological way of describing my life. I am talking about the period 1985-86.  
Let me talk about my next international trip. 
IFIP is an international federation of computer societies of several countries. It operated through many technical committees and many working groups. It was responsible for the development of COBOL language along with its  specifications and also for the evolution of commercial  database systems based on the network model. It was a powerful technical body. All its members were reputed academics and industrialists with a good depth of knowledge in a subdiscipline. 
CSI used to liaise with IFIP from India.  Gen A Balasubramanian, founding secretary of CSI and an active participant in computing ,  was handling IFIP matters in india. He was also the one who asked me to conduct a major conference on computers in power systems during 1976- 77 . I had mentioned this before. He was instrumental in bringing the IFIP conference on “ CAD, CAM, CAE for industrial progress “ which we conducted in Bangalore in 1984. I had talked about this major activity before. 
CSI made me  an Indian representative in IFIP TC7. It handled matters relating to systems and controls. I was scheduled to go to Tokyo for a conference and a meeting of TC7. 

I went to Madras for my Japanese visa . 
I met Gen AB. He introduced me to his travel agent. He was a very knowledgeable person. He recommended to me  that I travel by Thai airways. I said OK. He said I can extend my travel and go to Los Angeles on the same fare as for  Tokyo. So I agreed to book a ticket to LA. I didn't know where I would stay in LA and what I would do.
 He also gave me two  halts, one at Bangkok and another at Hong Kong  on the onward journey  and one at Singapore on the return trip with an overnight stay at Bangkok . The itinerary was a big one.  I needed to go to kolkata first and take a Thai airways  flight to Bangkok .  Then I had to go to Hong Kong.  From there I had to go to Tokyo . After a week's stay in Tokyo, I had to go to LA via Texas and Seattle.  Without any prior thinking I accepted the proposed itinerary.  I needed visas.
 I got my Japan visa after some hot discussions. I don't have an invitation from the Japanese organizers of the conference except a fax on the  acceptance of my paper, but i had a letter from IFIP for the meeting . They wanted a letter from the organizers. I said it might take a minimum of  fifteen days to get the letter. After some time,  they agreed to give me a tourist visa for a week. Trouble at the beginning itself. 
So I went to Chennai again  for my US visa. My mother and sister were still living in Ellaiamman colony at that time. It was about six months after my father's demise. 
So it was easy for me to go to the US consulate located near Gemini flyover. Luckily , I met a student of mine there and found out that he  was working in LA. His name is Eri Srivatsan, and  did his PhD with Prof Padayatti of the biochemistry department.  He did my course on Mathematics for biochemists ,and  got 100 out of 100. He remembered me and  told me that I can stay with him in LA. He said he would receive me at the LA airport on my arrival . It was a great relief. I was wondering how to spend 15 days in LA. 
I got my US visa.  This would be my second trip to the US but the last time I went to Boston and Washington and this time  to the west coast. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
19/08/24, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 451
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn put it, “the line separating good and evil passes not through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties either—but right through every human heart.”

This trip was worrying me. I had no idea where I would stay and what I would do?  Fortunately , Srivatsan helped me with his offer that I can stay with him. My accommodation in a hotel at Tokyo  was booked by the organizers for a week. That was also solved. 
I tried to fix some lectures at different places. 
I wrote to Prof Setty at Asian Institute of Technology for a lecture. I got a reply stating that computer science department will organize a talk by me . So they offered to take care of my pick up from airport and stay in their guest house during my visit to Bangkok. So that was taken care of. 
I wrote to National university , Singapore and they arranged a lecture and took care of my stay in the guest house. 
I wrote to Prof AV Balakrishnan at the university of California,  LA. He was also a member of TC7. So I was in correspondence with him even before. So he organised my lecture at his lab and hosted me for a day. 
One of my students CP Ravikumar was going to University of Southern California for his PhD. He said he would do his best to organize a talk by me. It was a surprise that his supervisor Dr Raghavendra  was also my student. He was happy to meet me and arrange my talk. He informed that two more students of mine were also faculty there. One of them was Ram Chellappa. Another was Prasannakumar.  So I had some activities in all places of visit, a happy state. I also was asked to give a talk at UC Berkeley.  So my plate was full and my trip was meaningful. 
So everything was set. But what about Hongkong? 
My cousin Jayanthi and her family were staying there . Subramanian,  her husband was working at Uco bank . So I wrote to them. They sent me a list of things to take from here. 
So my entire journey was set . 
I left for a council meeting of the institution of engineers at hyderabad along with two heavy bags. From hyderabad , I left for Kolkata by Indian airlines.  I left for Hong Kong.  I reached there by 10 pm. My cousin's husband , Subramanian received me at the airport and took me to his house. It was a sight seeing tour next day . I bought a suitcase ,since I didn't bring any suitcase. After a day , I left for Bangkok. I went to the guest house. 
I met Prof P Sadananda , who was with JNU earlier and had moved to AIT. After my lecture , they took me to a restaurant.  It was pure non veg. I just ate some plain rice. 
I left for Tokyo next. I went to the hotel. I went to the conference next day. Food was a big problem. I ate rice and a little soy sauce . So I had a serious problem of food there for a week. I met Prof Rao and Arumugham there. There was a student by name Swamy there. He invited us for dinner one day. He cooked rice and sambar for the three of us. The metro was good , fast and convenient. Taxis took more time. After a week, I left for LA. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
20/08/24, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 452
“we have seen a broad shift from a culture of humility to the culture of what you might call the Big Me, from a culture that encouraged people to think humbly of themselves to a culture that encouraged people to see themselves as the center of the universe.
in 1950, the Gallup Organization asked high school seniors if they considered themselves to be a very important person. At that point, 12 percent said yes. The same question was asked in 2005, and this time it wasn’t 12 percent who considered themselves very important, it was 80 percent.”
David Brooks.   “ Road to character”. 

I left the hotel by about 10 am , took a train and a bus to Narita airport. The airport is a good and clean one with less walking needed between gates. Systems worked. 
The travel from Tokyo to LA went across the Pacific ocean. It was a long travel of about 12 hours non stop. Seat was comfortable. Food was OK. I had a lot of tofu , rice ,fruits , bread, butter, coffee- not filter or cappuccino -,  lots of juice, no liquor . Asian vegetarian wasn't popular then. We crossed the International dateline. We reached Seattle . After a short one hour  halts  at Seattle, and San Jose , we reached LA. The flight continued further  to Texas. But I disembarked  in LA. Fortunately, Srivatsan was waiting at the gate itself.  There was no security gate or security check at that time even though indian airports introduced security checks by 1974 itself . His presence  was a great relief. We collected my suitcase and went to his house. They were very nice people, very religious and orthodox. He was working in the children's hospital doing cancer research . I got good south Indian food. 
I forgot to mention two another happenings in bangalore. After I returned from Chennai After US visa, I met N Chakrapani who was with us in the school of automation in early seventies as a systems programmer. He had problems with his PhD guide and fortunately got a job in US . He came to bangalore then. I met him in the department and invited him for lunch.   He was living close to LA in a place called Red lands. So he invited me to visit his place for a few days. 
Secondly, Rajan , my wife's cousin was moving into LA . I talked to him but didn't visit him. He was yet to get settled there. 
After being settled in Srivatsan’s house, I called Ravikumar to fix up a date to visit USC. Accordingly, my talk was fixed and I was dropped there by Srivatsan. I visited the department along with CP Ravikumar, met all past students - Raghavendra, Prasannakumar,  Ram Chellappa,  as well as Dr Sharma Sastry. ( Sastry was corrected by my AI edit to pastry,a  comedy). I was going alone for coffee after the talk. Some guys started chasing me. I ran away faster. USC is located in downtown LA , a bad locality. I escaped mugging. Otherwise I would have lost not only money but also my passport. Actually, the travel for a short distance of three quarters of a mile from Ravikumar‘s house to his department took us 40 minutes. It was because of a football match starting   at that time. I spent two days with them. 
I had a great experience. The university had a new Mac desktop . It was exciting. It had graphic user interface, touch screen, simple user friendly commands miles away from MSDOS and Unix that I was using at IISc.  I found it easy to use the machine. Within 15 minutes , I was checking my email. It was an awakening for me about the future path of graphics user interface systems. We have it today in our mobiles. See how old is this display technology. Touch screen was first identified by Steve Jobs and introduced in his computers and later in mobiles. While touch screen concept is old- mid eighties- , display technologies are improving from LCD to OLED to AMOLED leading to better accuracies / greater  clarity and lower power consumptions.  Now we also have POLED - plastic Light emiting diodes. 
My next lecture was at UCLA. I was told that it would take 40 minutes by bus to go to UCLA from USC. I decided to walk. It took me 40 minutes of brisk walk. 
Prof AV Balakrishnan gave me an office space to work . The talk went off well. He took me for dinner at an Indian restaurant.  Dinner wasn't good. He didn't like it. Srivatsan picked me after dinner. It was a very useful day. I read many papers of AVB and some books . 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
21/08/24, 4:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 453
“humility leads to wisdom. Montaigne once wrote, “We can be knowledgeable with other men’s knowledge, but we can’t be wise with other men’s wisdom.” That’s because wisdom isn’t a body of information. It’s the moral quality of knowing what you don’t know and figuring out a way to handle your ignorance, uncertainty, and limitation.”
David Brooks    road to character 

I should mention one particular habit of people that changed over the years and that is smoking. During my visit to Manchester in 1984, I found most people smoking. Most common rooms and pubs were filled with smoke. When I used to  came out of a common room, people asked me whether I was smoking. Even during my visit to Boston by air France , I found fifty percent of people smoking. It was very difficult for me. I used to get headache frequently. But this visit changed the scene. There was a separate non smoke area. But very few smoked. All common areas including supermarkets were clear places with none smoking everywhere. It is surprising that about 80% had quit smoking or smoked a few cigarettes in private. The awareness was perceptible.  The second change I saw compared to my first visit was that some vegetarian food was available in restaurants. Most were beginning to understand some concepts of vegetarianism.  I didn't survive on apples, bananas , juices and bread. The breakfast spread improved considerably without that unbearable bacon frying smell that I suffered in Manchester. 
Well, a good positive progress. 
My next engagement was to visit Red lands with Chakrapani. He picked me from Srivatsan ‘s house and drove to his place - about two hours of drive. I met his wife, but sons  weren't present there. Chakrapani took me to his department,  introduced me to colleagues, but couldn't arrange a lecture. After two days with him, he drove me back to LA. That day was Krishna Janmashtami.  So he stayed till the  Puja was over. 

I went with Srivatsan for purchases. I bought two good backpacks for my children to take their books to school. Both were good ones and serviced them till they completed schooling. At that time, no backpacks were available in India. Those available were flimsy. So it was a good purchase. I bought a leather bag which was used till 2010. I also bought the famous California almonds and chocolates. 
 So it was time to go to Berkeley for a lecture. I flew to San Francisco and took a coach to Berkeley.  I stayed in the guest house. After the talk at the environmental and resources department,  I walked around and saw Prof CV Ramamurthy,  whom I had met in bangalore earlier. Surprise, I met Dr Vason Srini in the evening and we had a great evening.  He prepared dosa for me. Then by 9pm, we visited the CS department.  I met several faculty working at 10 pm. That is the work culture there. 
I met the developers of Unix Berkeley version - Ben Thompson and Bill Joy - and Ingress data base. I met Michael Stonebreaker ,who developed Ingress relational database, the first RDB in 1973. It was a memorable experience for me. Dr Srini dropped me at the SFO airport. Srivatsan picked me from an airport close to his house. So ended my trip to Berkeley. 
More in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
22/08/24, 5:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 454
“A good theory doesn’t change its mind: it doesn’t apply only to some companies or people, and not to others. It is a general statement of what causes what, and why. Competition in the computer chip market and the proliferation of global terrorism could not seem like more different problems to tackle. But they are fundamentally the same problem, just in different contexts. Good theory can help us categorize, explain, and, most important, predict.
People often think that the best way to predict the future is by collecting as much data as possible before making a decision. But this is like driving a car looking only at the rearview mirror—because data is only available about the past.
 Indeed, while experiences and information can be good teachers, there are many times in life where we simply cannot afford to learn on the job. You don’t want to have to go through multiple marriages to learn how to be a good spouse. Or wait until your last child has grown to master parenthood. This is why theory can be so valuable: it can explain what will happen, even before you experience it.”
Theory of disruptive innovation 
Clayton Christensen,    innovator's dilemma 



Now it was time to start the return leg . I took another flight and reached Seattle early. I took the Thai airways flight to Bangkok in the evening and reached the first halt at Tokyo ,but not on the same day , instead on the previous day. ( no reverse time travel . We lose a day at the International timeline midway in the Pacific.). I reached Bangkok and stayed in the airport hotel . I left for Singapore the next morning. 
I had problem while checking in  for Singapore flight. The checkin person wanted to know whether I had 500 dollars as per Singapore government regulations. I said I don't have. But I have a ticket to India from there after a day. He issued the boarding pass. I took a cab and went to the national university. I stayed in their guest house . I went to the department,  met Dr Ananda , Prof Raman, HV Narayana Rao’s son in law , Dr John and a few other faculty members. I had lunch in the food court after the lecture. I went to Serangoon street , known as Little India,  in the evening and had dosa at komala Vilas hotel. 
I left for Madras the next day . It was an Air India flight. I reached Madras in the early hours and finished immigration and took my (?) Suitcase and went home. I found out in the morning that the suitcase was not mine but a similar one. I went back to the airport. They gave an address to find  the owner of the suitcase mistakenly taken by me. The auto driver took me there , but they said he wasn't there. It was a lie. The airlines told me they will inform me once they get the person. I left the suitcase in Madras and went home to Bangalore by train. My children were happy to see me. 
After a few days, I got a message, went to Chennai and took the other suitcase to the airport. The owner of that suitcase came with a few people and asked me to hand over his suitcase. Fortunately, the airline representative was helpful and cautioned me . He said “ don't hand it over until your suitcase is cleared through customs”. So I kept that suitcase with me . We went to customs, got both suitcases opened and checked . The senior officer was helpful and cleared both. We exchanged suitcases.  The other person demanded money. I gave him 200 rupees  and returned to Bangalore by train .
 My children received their school backpacks . I got an electronic  game for my son. 
So I settled down for my usual work schedule. 
The trip was smooth without any major problems , and I met many experts in many places - AIT, Univ of Tokyo, USC, UCLA, UCB, NUS, . I had an invite from Prof Kailath , Stanford . I couldn't visit him. It was a great and professionally useful trip. 
My one big problem was that I didn't have enough dollars , just enough to meet my expenses. I didn't get any cash for my lectures in the US. I got cash for my talk from NUS. Fortunately, my stay at most places was free, but I had to pay for a hotel for about five days in Tokyo. So I couldn't buy many things. I came back with about 20 or so dollars. I managed to survive. 
Greetings
Dks
23/08/24, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 455
“For nearly all of history, people’s lives have been governed primarily by ignorance. This was nowhere more clear than with the illnesses that befell us. We knew little about what caused them or what could be done to remedy them. But sometime over the last several decades—and it is only over the last several decades—science has filled in enough knowledge to make ineptitude as much our struggle as ignorance.”
“Studies have found that at least 30 percent of patients with stroke receive incomplete or inappropriate care from their doctors, as do 45 percent of patients with asthma and 60 percent of patients with pneumonia. Getting the steps right is proving brutally hard, even if you know them.”
Atul Gawande.      Checklists 

There are some comments.
N Ramanathan has commented on smoking:
“I too had silently suffered in the midst of smokers in meetings endlessly in the early part of my career. Passive smokers’ plight was miserable then. In flights, we used to opt for non-smoking zone that could help just reduce but not eliminate the problem.
It’s a happy relief that since 2001 and onwards there is good reductio0n in per capita consumption of cigarettes in India too. Govt restrictions played a catalyst role. Air-conditioning of offices, railways and public places helped expedite the process, as smokers have to get out of their seat each time. This acted as a good disincentive. There is thus perceptible change in public area smoking.
Tobacco was also consumed in the form of snuff and along with betel leaf. The former inhaled through nose was no nuisance to others, except giving a brown coat to the bottom of users’ nose. With no Govt intervention, this habit has since died a natural death. 
The other form of chewing and spitting was spoiling the look of streets and walls besides being a health hazard. This practice was too common in the villages, though limited with office goers, because of the trouble in moving out of the seat for spitting at regular intervals. This too has disappeared in the South, though still largely prevalent in States like Bengal and Orissa.
In all, a welcome relief for the gullibles like us.”
H S Nagaraja writes about Chakrapani that he helped him in his computing work at IISc computer centre. 

Srinivasan PNB suggests that I should explain the quotes. 
My response 
I am happy many are reading the quotes.  Actually I don't write a concise quote, but write a descriptive note with one concept in it. 
If I start explaining the quotes, that will be another stream of posts.  So my request is : that if anyone wants a clarity on a quote , please send me a message and  I will try my best to detail it. 
Thanks to all. 
Greetings 
Dks
23/08/24, 7:47 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sir, We are getting 3 eminent personalities related to technology and geopolitics. Please try to attend this session tomorrow as a special invitee and spread the word in your communities. It is an open event. <This message was edited>
23/08/24, 7:47 am - Sanjay Chitnis: I am excited that Center of Excellence for Geopolitics and International studies, REVA University is hosting a Panel Discussion on
*“India: Seeking More Strategic Autonomy in Critical Technologies”*
with 3 very eminent personalities:
*Dr. Sridhar Vembu*, Padma Shri, Co-founder & CEO, ZOHO Corp, member of UGC and National Security Advisory Board
*Sri Sharad Sharma*, Co-founder, iSPIRT India, member, UN advisory board on AI; member of National Startup Advisory Council; member, SEBI's Financial and Regulatory Technology Committee, 
*Sri Rajiv Malhotra*, Eminent Indologist and Author of books including Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Power

Moderated by: Dr. T.S. Mohan, Founder, Pragyan Datalabs

Hon. Chancellor Dr. P. Shyama Raju will preside over the function.

Date: Saturday 24th August 2024, Time: 2:00PM- 4:00 PM (including special event)
Venue: Chanakya Auditorium, REVA University 

*ALL ARE WELCOME*

Abstract:
For the past several years, post Covid pandemic, geopolitical powers across the world have been scrambling to more effectively pursue efforts in seeking strategic autonomy in several pathbreaking critical technologies that have been predicted to define who will matter in influencing world affairs. The top critical technologies that one can count on making a huge difference for humanity at large include Artificial General Intelligence & Robotics, Material Sciences & Energy Management including Small Nuclear Reactors and Green Hydrolysers, Drug discovery & Life Sciences, Quantum Computing & Cryptography, Reusable Rockets, Semiconductors. Similarly, the top dimensions on which these critical technologies are going to impact us include sustainability; individual, community and cohesive societal empowerment; securing reliable supply chains apart from reskilling and effectively channelizing workforce across the board for effective economy. In this hour plus panel, we critically look back at India's past efforts in pursuing strategic autonomy as compared to its peers and posit avenues that India has missed out and should pursue in order to gain its edge in the pursuit of strategic autonomy in critical technologies.
23/08/24, 7:47 am - Sanjay Chitnis: You deleted this message
23/08/24, 7:48 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sri Rajiv has another event tomorrow at IISc
24/08/24, 5:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 456

“To the Indian it is clear that the Self as the originating ground of the psyche is not different from God, and that, so far as a man is in the Self, he is not only contained in God but actually is God. Shri Ramana is quite explicit on this point. The goal of Eastern religious practice is the same as that of Western Mysticism: the shifting of the centre of gravity from the ego to the Self, from man to God. This means that the ego disappears in the Self, and man in God. It is evident that Shri Ramana has either really been more or less absorbed by the Self, or at least has struggled earnestly all his life to extinguish his ego in it. If we conceive the Self as the essence of psychic wholeness, i.e., as the totality of conscious and unconscious, we do so because it does in fact represent something like a goal of spiritual development. This formula shows the dissolution of the ego in the atman to be the unequivocal goal of religion and ethics, as exemplified in the thought of Shri Ramana. “
Carl Jung


Let me return to the year 1986,  to bangalore and talk about my life after the trip. The trip created an awareness of some other countries, several institutions , varieties of governance, commitment by faculty members , social life etc. It broadened my world view. I saw the similarities in family  life in several countries of Asia.  The clockwork precision of various occurrences during my trip with no missteps or mishaps surprised me. I am reminded of Paulo Coelho's belief that the world helps you achieve your dreams. 

As I said earlier, I initiated a lot of teaching activities in many other institutions outside IISc. I started teaching at IIM Bangalore at the initiative of my wife's cousin , Narayanan Kapali. It wasn't easy. I had to travel by bus and auto. I went to the majestic bus stand and had to take a rural  bus going to Bannerghatta. The bus was infrequent . After somedays , I found an easier way of travel. I went from majestic to Jayanagar 7th block east by a minibus, a very convenient way of travel. Then I either took a bus to IIM or walked. I met several faculty members at IIM.  Prof Philip had taken over as director, but the employees were protesting on most days. I met Prof Kaujalgi who helped me to navigate through IIM.  I met professors Jagadish, Ram Mohan Rao, Chandrasekar . I saw one major difference in teaching IISc students and IIM students. IISc students mostly won't ask questions. They were focussed and were confident of learning by themselves. So they never asked me questions, but I used to be quizzed by IIM  students and I liked it. But I didn't see any motivation in the students there.
 I was surprised that neither  the students nor the faculty  saw or perceive the disruptive innovation coming. They didn't realise the future impacts of IT on business. Even the faculty had no interest  on  the impacts of technology on business .  I didn't have opportunity to discuss technology vs business ideas of mine with my exposure to TCS, Karnataka government, my shift to client server approach in my lab with HCLs Horizon computers. Actually I wrote a newspaper article titled “ computers and society”  in 1985 on the occasion of our international conference “ CAD, CAM, CAE for industrial progress.” It was published by times of India and it pictured the immediate changes that will happen in our society with computers. 

At that time , many training institutes were established at every street corner in bangalore and most were cheating the gullible. So I wrote another article called computer alchemists in times of India in 1986. It said that these institutions claim to transform an unemployed person to a level of prosperity. One institution even told its students to keep their passport ready hinting that they may get a job abroad. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
25/08/24, 5:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 457
Although this may seem a paradox, all exact science is dominated by the idea of approximation. When a man tells you that he knows the exact truth about anything, you are safe in inferring that he is an inexact man. Every careful measurement in science is always given with the probable error ... every observer admits that he is likely wrong, and knows about how much wrong he is likely to be.

Bertrand Russell
Everything we know is only some kind of approximation, because we know that we do not know all the laws yet. Therefore, things must be learned only to be unlearned again or, more likely, to be corrected.

Richard P. Feynman


Let me make my views clear on training. 
Though I was not happy with the mushrooming of training centres, I appreciated the need and utility of good centres. I was involved with Datamatics in 1970 itself. I saw the impact of NIIT. When a company floated by one of my students needed a unix aware person, I selected a student with BCom qualification trained at NIIT. I didn't find many engineers  employed by the public sector units or many engineering graduates suitable. This was a revelation for me. 
Let me shift to computer  engineering education during the eighties.
I saw that  some American universities started computer courses and specialisation in the mid sixties itself. Initially it was housed in EE department and later it became a separate department.  I saw some institutions running separate computer science programs in UK and many faculty involved in CS research, but mostly hardware.
 But the situation in india was distressing. 
Till 1986, no engineering institution outside IIT s and IISc,  were even teaching a course on computers,  let alone build a full-fledged program. To my knowledge , first IIT Bombay had a separate centre but under EE department even in 1966. It had some faculty , but focus was hardware. IIT kanpur had a strong computer science activity from the beginning.  IIT  madras started its separate CS department and recruited many faculty in early 70s. They had a big bang approach , started off very well.
 So it was the few good training institutions that filled the skills gap first in programming, then on hardware, then on databases , graphics etc. They were agile and capitalized on the market. They understood the growing need of a futuristic skill set and moved into that gap. Our educational institutions were static, didn't understand both the current and future markets even till the beginning of the twentifirst century. Did they learn a lesson? The answer is no. 
During the mid eighties, a few of our engineering colleges started a CS undergraduate program without any faculty. Most were handled by EE staff. The situation was bad and continued in that state  for more than a decade. 
I wanted to help. So my involvement with many colleges in teaching courses and recruiting faculty began. It became a major saga. 
Greetings
Dks
25/08/24, 6:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: For nearly all of history, people’s lives have been governed primarily by ignorance. This was nowhere more clear than with the illnesses that befell us. We knew little about what caused them or what could be done to remedy them. But sometime over the last several decades—and it is only over the last several decades—science has filled in enough knowledge to make ineptitude as much our struggle as ignorance.”
“Studies have found that at least 30 percent of patients with stroke receive incomplete or inappropriate care from their doctors, as do 45 percent of patients with asthma and 60 percent of patients with pneumonia. Getting the steps right is proving brutally hard, even if you know them.”
Atul Gawande.      Checklists 
“A good theory doesn’t change its mind: it doesn’t apply only to some companies or people, and not to others. It is a general statement of what causes what, and why. Competition in the computer chip market and the proliferation of global terrorism could not seem like more different problems to tackle. But they are fundamentally the same problem, just in different contexts. Good theory can help us categorize, explain, and, most important, predict.
People often think that the best way to predict the future is by collecting as much data as possible before making a decision. But this is like driving a car looking only at the rearview mirror—because data is only available about the past.
 Indeed, while experiences and information can be good teachers, there are many times in life where we simply cannot afford to learn on the job. You don’t want to have to go through multiple marriages to learn how to be a good spouse. Or wait until your last child has grown to master parenthood. This is why theory can be so valuable: it can explain what will happen, even before you experience it.”
Theory of disruptive innovation 
Clayton Christensen,    innovator's dilemma
Two views of problem solving
Greetings
Dks
26/08/24, 5:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 458
“Plato believed that reality is divided into two parts: the ideal and the phenomena. The ideal is the perfect reality of existence. The phenomena are the physical world that we experience; it is a flawed echo of the perfect, ideal model that exists outside of space and time.
Plato calls the perfect ideal the Forms.
Plato demonstrates this concept of the Forms in an illustration called The Allegory of the Cave. In Plato's allegory, there is a dark cave in which people have been chained to a wall since birth. Behind the heads of these prisoners, there is a fire burning. Objects are passed in front of this fire and it projects silhouetted images onto the wall in front of the prisoners. The prisoners perceive these shadow objects as reality because they have never known anything else.

Sometimes, a prisoner is freed. They look around the cave and are frightened and confused by their surroundings. They then climb out of the cave in an arduous and painful quest. When they reach the mouth of the cave, they are forced to consider the sun, the world above, and the cave from which they came. This freed prisoner would then be compelled to return to the cave and attempt to free his fellow man.”
Plato.       Republic

My uncle gives his views:
My  dear   nephew, 

“ -Your  posts  on  Tokyo  and  US  are   simply  amazing,  awe-inspiring  and  adventurous,   How   many   Cities,   new  faces,  lodges,  so-called food,  loss  of  regular   habits  and  sleep,  high  level   lectures  delivered  before   elite   audience   in    reputed   universities   and   institutions   of   higher   learning,  time   spent   on  preparations   of  lectures,   a   possible    threatening  of mugging   - Thank   God,  Pass-port  was  saved, -      all  the   above  are  beyond   my   imagination. 

Your   exercises  and  experiences   remind   me   of   Lord   Hanuman   in  Sundara   Kandam,   He  too  had  to   visit   many   unknown  places   in   Lanka,   see  many   new   faces,  had  no  food,  no  sleep,   He  gave   lectures   to  Sitadevi   and   Ravana, , for  others , he   gave  fires  to   their   houses   in  place   of   lectures,   While   you   had  Srivatsan   for  help,  he  had  Vibhishana,  Both  of   you   returned   with   success   in   the mission,    Just   as   Lord  Hanuman   gave   two   words   '
  '  DRISHTA   SITA  '   to  Sri  Rama  and   Sri   Lakshmana,  and   made  them   happy,   you  too  ¹gave   two  good  backpacks  ( not  available   in   India  )  to   Anu  and  Murali  and  made  them   happy,
Let  your Tokyo    USA  visits  be  ever  green   in  our  memory, 
Ramakrishnan,   Uncle   24   -   8  -   24” 

Quite embarrassing.  I did nothing . I did what any of my colleagues had done. Nothing special, nothing out of the ordinary. 
Thanks
Greetings
Dks
26/08/24, 5:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy Janmashtami to all. 
Greetings
Dks
26/08/24, 5:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy Janmashtami,  Sri Krishna Jayanthi.
27/08/24, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 459
“Know-how and sophistication have increased remarkably across almost all our realms of endeavor, and as a result so has our struggle to deliver on them. You see it in the frequent mistakes authorities make when hurricanes or tornadoes or other disasters hit. You see it in the 36 percent increase between 2004 and 2007 in lawsuits against attorneys for legal mistakes—the most common being simple administrative errors, like missed calendar dates and clerical screw ups, as well as errors in applying the law. You see it in flawed software design, in foreign intelligence failures, in our tottering banks—in fact, in almost any endeavor requiring mastery of complexity and of large amounts of knowledge.”
Clayton Christensen.       Checklists

Prof Vasudev Parvati has a comment on training institutions vs colleges. 
“Sir the current buzzwords in the training arena are AI based softwares and Data analytics tools. Educational institutions still do not expose their students to things like Power BI or Tableau which are met in present days by online educators like Unacademy.How do you view this trend?”

My response 
Thanks. It is an important point to ponder by teachers. So you have raised this aspect. 
You are correct. I have been watching this phenomenon for more than four decades . It hasn't changed. 
It is an accepted fact that academic institutions are not flexible, are not focussed on technologies and skills, concentrate on basics and take years to change. So we needed an alternate mechanism to train people on latest skills. This led to the mushrooming of training institutions. Even government of India's skills training is dated. So we see many of these institutions play a role. 
As I said earlier, they played a good role in producing higher skills people. For instance It was these institutions which trained lakhs of COBOL programmers who could write large application programs in our industries, banks and IT industries and not university or college students. Our institutions failed there. Similarly a total view of Java was taught by training centres producing industry usable Java people. Academic institutions concentrated basic Java but not J2EE or J2EE or servers or applets etc. I interviewed 800 BEs and MCAs  for corporation bank and none could explain these concepts. 
Even we are not able to scale up properly on our courses. That is why we saw the rise of coursera , edX, etc. Even a great teaching came from khan academy.  Their java tutorial was a good one. I suggested about 20 plus years back that we should adapt that course and not teach it in the class. Instead the teacher should guide the students to write a large program for a big application. I am against teaching programming , but we should focus on solving large problems. while many big institutions are partially moving in that direction, most run class room lectures explaining instruction formats. This isvlike teaching swimming in a class room. I am disappointed that we can't change this mindset. 
 YouTube  has thousands of contents. None of our institutionsuse these contents to a great extent. We need to change, adapt and provide flexibilty beyond curriculum and standard teaching. 
I feel we need to wake up. There was a discussion in the sixties and seventies on the differences between university BEs and IE, IETE graduates. Now we need to ask what are the goals for survival of engineering education with genAI replacing teachers and giving a holistic learning platform for people. More danger is coming . So wake up. 
Greetings 
Dks
28/08/24, 5:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 460
“Human beings evolved to live in small bands with people more or less like themselves. But today, many of us live in wonderfully pluralistic societies. In America, Europe, India, and many other places, we’re trying to build mass multicultural democracies, societies that contain people from diverse races and ethnicities, with different ideologies and backgrounds. To survive, pluralistic societies require citizens who can look across difference and show the kind of understanding that is a prerequisite of trust—who can say, at the very least, “I’m beginning to see you. Certainly, I will never fully experience the world as you experience it, but I’m beginning, a bit, to see the world through your eyes.”
David Brooks 

Mrs Rukmani Anantharaman comments on my long multi country trip.
“Dear Anna,
Namaskarams.
The narration of your international trips is truly amazing, I wonder how you managed all such travel and lectures so smoothly, especially at a time when there were no  mobile phones or net connectivity.
We can see that you have always been several steps ahead in anticipating the trends in the field of  computer education.Your remarkable  contributions to   various educational and social organizations are beyond one's imagination.  And I agree with you ,it makes me believe in  the theme in 'The Alchemist'.
Your reference to  your lectures at Berkeley makes me want to share this with you- my grandson has got admission in UC Berkeley this year (Bio Engineering course).
Happy Janmashtami.”
My response:
Thanks. 
Looking ahead has become a pastime with me from childhood. I wanted to improve my learning, my execution of tasks, my looking at the application of new  technologies and most importantly our societal transformations and education.  That was my mission in addition to teaching , mentoring, helping many  and social support. 
As I said in the beginning , nature is interconnected , multidimensional and complex.  One dimensional linearization through specialised focus ,I felt early in my life itself , not the only approach. I showed interest in multiple aspects of life even when I was ten. These include religious aspects like recitation of upanishads,Rudram  , chamakam,  spiritual aspects, construction, planning , organization, behaviour of people, living conditions, purchases, accounting etc. 

Even during my school days, I was fascinated with electricity,  engineering - got involved with construction work, carpentry, lime mortar production, masonry etc.- , and saw the changes In technologies without any understanding or use of technologies. My close association with my uncle and his mentorship  helped me  in sharpening my interest and knowledge. 
I learnt one lesson - life is not a stagnant eat and sleep activity. It is a  highly changing system of many complex and new activities. 
Let me explain changes in bus transport during the first ten years of my life. We traveled by bullock carts. But living on the national highway, we had bus service to go to Tirunelveli or Nagercoil.  Buses were small with no full body and were  initially  running on wood gas. I remember playing with the wheel to pump more air . Then within a few years , I saw diesel run buses. Then I saw buses changed from open entry and exit type to buses with closed doors. Buses became big and looked great. This made an impression on me as a child about the importance of technology in our life. 
Similarly, I saw the society transforming itself at good pace - migrations of people to far off cities for jobs, changes in work culture, onset of college education,  use of electricity, change in dresses and food habits etc, arrival of radio and telephone , poor families becoming rich , rich families becoming poor, etc. I will write about social transformation later. 
So from childhood , observing changes in our society and technology and predicting trends got into me as a hobby and later became a part of me. I didn't and don't have any special skills in this. I didn't anticipate most of the developments . I was just a small step ahead, that is all. 
Greetings 
Dks
29/08/24, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 461
Our belief system is our personal truth that governs our mind. Our judgments are all based on our belief system, even if they tend to challenge our innermost nature. There’s a part of our mind that constantly evaluates everything and everyone. There’s also another part that receives all the judgments and carries the guilt, blame, and shame.
Your belief system makes you fear anything that goes against it. Whatever it is that makes you question your beliefs will certainly bring you a sense of insecurity. This is the main reason why it’s necessary to have the courage to argue regarding our beliefs.
Don Miguel Ruiz 

I was a small tool in 1967 to upgrade the power supply to IISc from KEB to 11kv and thereby reducing interruptions and  meeting our power demands for the next 15 to 20 years. 

Now in 1985, IISc was in a similar situation .  As the chair of the power committee at IISc,  I was concerned about the growth of our power demands. First the substation setup to meet IISc power needs at Gymkhana grounds started supplying power to BWSSB and BHEL . So it was overloaded and tripped regularly. 

Secondly, IISc was planning a new super computer and it needed a lot of power. Our existing system will not be able to meet our demands. 
So I felt that we needed a new look , not an augmentation. I talked to Prof Ramaseshan.  He wasn't receptive. 
But in 1984, Prof CNR Rao took over as director. So I talked to him about the need for a new design for power at IISc.  He understood my statements and agreed immediately. 
So I went through a series of steps to solve this problem. It was one of my good exercise in solving a major practical problem. I solved a few major  problems before like BCCL power distribution, Delhi electric supply , sysgel for TCS etc. 
So how did I go about it?
My first step was to decide that we need to change our power supply to meet our needs . That is recognition and identification of a problem. That was done. 
The next step was to find out whether it was  possible to make small changes to our power supply?
 I felt that the existing substation of KEB at Gymkhana area won't be useful as KEB was not upgrading it. So we need to look for a new supply feeder. 
So the third step was to look for another reliable power supply feeder from KEB. 
There are two options here: 1.go for 11kv itself and increase the capacity. 
2. Upgrade to the next higher voltage supply. 
I started on a search for a new feeder from KEB to IISc which will take care of iisc power requirements for the next 20 years at least. When I look at it now in 2024,  I am happy my solution has stood for more than 40 years and is meeting the IISc demands even now. 
We found that KEB was constructing a 220kv / 66 Kv substation nearby in the new BEL road about 4 kms from our institute. So I felt 66kv was a very good option for iisc and it means that interruptions will be much less compared to our existing 11kv feeder. I informed Prof CNR about my decision to go for 66Kv because of cost implications - more than a crore. He told me to go ahead. 
So I decided on   66kv supply to IIScfrom KEB. I met with  problems from within and without. It received two objections. 
 Prof Chandrasekariah of HV department met me and said that we should consider the option of three overhead 11kv lines instead of the 66kv cable that I was thinking of between the new BEL road substation of KEB upto IISc end point near Ramiah hospital. It is a fact that the 66kv cable’s cost was quite substantial. The estimate was about 60 lakhs.
Here is the dilemma. If I go with 11kv cost will be less ,but it had problems. 
Firstly, IISc load was growing at a rate of 10% every year. So within 10 years we need to look for a new  option for supply.  So if we look at the cost for a longer period , the 11kv option loses its cost advantage. 
Secondly , with 11kv incoming in overhead lines, the interruptions will be high. 
So I rejected his suggestion after discussing in the power committee.  
The second objection was a bigger and unexpected bomb. The chairman of KEB , Mr BG Rudrappa, a good friend of mine who helped me in getting power connection to my house , met Prof CNR Rao. He told him that   IISc    didn't need 66kv. 11kv was  good enough for IISc.  This needed a rebuttal. We met Mr Govindappa , the Technical director of KEB and took him to Prof Rao to convince him of the need for 66kv. I gave only one one fact to support my decision - “Do you want iisc to be one in thousands for it's power supply or one in ten. “ . The answer was in favor if 66kv. 
So this step is crossed. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
29/08/24, 6:27 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 461
Our belief system is our personal truth that governs our mind. Our judgments are all based on our belief system, even if they tend to challenge our innermost nature. There’s a part of our mind that constantly evaluates everything and everyone. There’s also another part that receives all the judgments and carries the guilt, blame, and shame.
Your belief system makes you fear anything that goes against it. Whatever it is that makes you question your beliefs will certainly bring you a sense of insecurity. This is the main reason why it’s necessary to have the courage to argue regarding our beliefs.
Don Miguel Ruiz 

I was a small tool in 1967 to upgrade the power supply to IISc from KEB to 11kv and thereby reducing interruptions and  meeting our power demands for the next 15 to 20 years. 

Now in 1985, IISc was in a similar situation .  As the chair of the power committee at IISc,  I was concerned about the growth of our power demands. First the substation setup to meet IISc power needs at Gymkhana grounds started supplying power to BWSSB and BHEL . So it was overloaded and tripped regularly. 

Secondly, IISc was planning a new super computer and it needed a lot of power. Our existing system will not be able to meet our demands. 
So I felt that we needed a new look , not an augmentation. I talked to Prof Ramaseshan.  He wasn't receptive. 
But in 1984, Prof CNR Rao took over as director. So I talked to him about the need for a new design for power at IISc.  He understood my statements and agreed immediately. 
So I went through a series of steps to solve this problem. It was one of my good exercise in solving a major practical problem. I solved a few major  problems before like BCCL power distribution, Delhi electric supply , sysgel for TCS etc. 
So how did I go about it?
My first step was to decide that we need to change our power supply to meet our needs . That is recognition and identification of a problem. That was done. 
The next step was to find out whether it was  possible to make small changes to our power supply?
 I felt that the existing substation of KEB at Gymkhana area won't be useful as KEB was not upgrading it. So we need to look for a new supply feeder. 
So the third step was to look for another reliable power supply feeder from KEB. 
There are two options here: 1.go for 11kv itself and increase the capacity. 
2. Upgrade to the next higher voltage supply. 
I started on a search for a new feeder from KEB to IISc which will take care of iisc power requirements for the next 20 years at least. When I look at it now in 2024,  I am happy my solution has stood for more than 40 years and is meeting the IISc demands even now. 
We found that KEB was constructing a 220kv / 66 Kv substation nearby in the new BEL road about 4 kms from our institute. So I felt 66kv was a very good option for iisc and it means that interruptions will be much less compared to our existing 11kv feeder. I informed Prof CNR about my decision to go for 66Kv because of cost implications - more than a crore. He told me to go ahead. 
So I decided on   66kv supply to IIScfrom KEB. I met with  problems from within and without. It received two objections. 
 Prof Chandrasekariah of HV department met me and said that we should consider the option of three overhead 11kv lines instead of the 66kv cable that I was thinking of between the new BEL road substation of KEB upto IISc end point near Ramiah hospital. It is a fact that the 66kv cable’s cost was quite substantial. The estimate was about 60 lakhs.
Here is the dilemma. If I go with 11kv cost will be less ,but it had problems. 
Firstly, IISc load was growing at a rate of 10% every year. So within 10 years we need to look for a new  option for supply.  So if we look at the cost for a longer period , the 11kv option loses its cost advantage. 
Secondly , with 11kv incoming in overhead lines, the interruptions will be high. 
So I rejected his suggestion after discussing in the power committee.  
The second objection was a bigger and unexpected bomb. The chairman of KEB , Mr BG Rudrappa, a good friend of mine who helped me in getting power connection to my house , met Prof CNR Rao. He told him that   IISc    didn't need 66kv. 11kv was  good enough for IISc.  This needed a rebuttal. We met Mr Govindappa , the Technical director of KEB and took him to Prof Rao to convince him of the need for 66kv. I gave only one one fact to support my decision - “Do you want iisc to be one in thousands for it's power supply or one in ten. “ . The answer was in favor if 66kv. 
So this step is crossed. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
30/08/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 462
“Each of you has a call on your lives. Every one of you carries an instinct for excellence within your spirits. No one in this room needs to stay frozen in average and succumb to the mass mediocratization of behavior evident in society along with the collective de-professionalization of business so apparent in industry. Limitation is nothing more than a mentality that too many good people practice daily until they believe it’s reality. It breaks my heart to see so many potentially powerful human beings stuck in a story about why they can’t be extraordinary, professionally and personally. You need to remember that your excuses are seducers, your fears are liars and your doubts are thieves.”
Robin Sharma.   Five am club

We decided to move from 11kv and  go for 66kv as the next higher voltage input for IISc. The year was 1985. It was not an easy step. 
The next step was to decide on our main 66kv/11kv sub station. It was reasonably easy. We located a spot close to the new BEL road opposite to the  CEDT building. We decided 5 MVA capacity was enough . We introduced three rings of distribution throughout the entire campus. 
The next step was to decide on connecting KEB main station to our substation,  in the institute , the distance being about 3kms - partly about 1.6km on BEL road and the remaining inside the campus. The decision was the feeder coming along BEL road would be cable and the feeder inside will be overhead line. This decision reduced the total cost. 
Then started the detailed designs and cost estimations. We engaged Esquire engineers as consultants. They did a complete design of the substation and internal distribution network . Since the 11kv ring main inside the campus is overloaded, we added more 11kv/400v stations . Along with the supercomputer sub station , we decided to go for three rings to improve protection and operations. We decided to go for 11kv cables for the internal campus network instead of overhead lines as it would reduce interruptions. 
The consultants recommended taping a 11kv joint for insulation. I was puzzled . I had seen taping a joint in 1962 at Meenakshi mills during our internship. I asked myself ,” was there no improvement in jointing methods”. I did a literature check and found two approaches - one in situ mold preparation using synthetic insulation powders like ptfe. Another was precast porcelain  bushings.  
We decided to go for Raychem jointing for 11 kv cables used in the campus network .  The total cost estimate was about 1.5 crore rupees, a bit high compared to the 11kv input voltage based design. This excluded the cost of the 66kv cable.  It was worth it ,as it stood the test of time. 
I discussed the proposals with Prof Rao. He agreed to the proposal and costs. So,  we floated a tender. We had another problem coming up here on the eligibility conditions in the tender. The condition was that the bidding company should have installed a 66Kv substation. Many local contractors had not worked on 66kv at that time  and were upset that they were excluded. Some were big ones, some had been working in the institute for some time. I was not prepared to experiment with inexperienced companies.66kv systems needed special skills particularly while joining two cables. So  I felt it was risky. So despite the estate officer's request, I rejected the request. Sympathy won't work here. 
Bombay Suburban was the lowest tender. The company was a famous one, operating half of Bombay electricity and had a few top officers who were our students. So evaluation was easy. It was approved by the power committee,  and the director. Order was issued. They were given the complete 66kv substation electrical panel work and a few new 11kv substations. The cable work was tendered separately. 
There were not many companies making 66kv cables. Siemens, Birla and Gloster were known names. When we floated the tender a new company from Kochi premier cables submitted their quote. It brought in a new problem. Let us discuss it  in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
30/08/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 462
“Each of you has a call on your lives. Every one of you carries an instinct for excellence within your spirits. No one in this room needs to stay frozen in average and succumb to the mass mediocratization of behavior evident in society along with the collective de-professionalization of business so apparent in industry. Limitation is nothing more than a mentality that too many good people practice daily until they believe it’s reality. It breaks my heart to see so many potentially powerful human beings stuck in a story about why they can’t be extraordinary, professionally and personally. You need to remember that your excuses are seducers, your fears are liars and your doubts are thieves.”
Robin Sharma.   Five am club

We decided to move from 11kv and  go for 66kv as the next higher voltage input for IISc. The year was 1985. It was not an easy step. 
The next step was to decide on our main 66kv/11kv sub station. It was reasonably easy. We located a spot close to the new BEL road opposite to the  CEDT building. We decided 5 MVA capacity was enough . We introduced three rings of distribution throughout the entire campus. 
The next step was to decide on connecting KEB main station to our substation,  in the institute , the distance being about 3kms - partly about 1.6km on BEL road and the remaining inside the campus. The decision was the feeder coming along BEL road would be cable and the feeder inside will be overhead line. This decision reduced the total cost. 
Then started the detailed designs and cost estimations. We engaged Esquire engineers as consultants. They did a complete design of the substation and internal distribution network . Since the 11kv ring main inside the campus is overloaded, we added more 11kv/400v stations . Along with the supercomputer sub station , we decided to go for three rings to improve protection and operations. We decided to go for 11kv cables for the internal campus network instead of overhead lines as it would reduce interruptions. 
The consultants recommended taping a 11kv joint for insulation. I was puzzled . I had seen taping a joint in 1962 at Meenakshi mills during our internship. I asked myself ,” was there no improvement in jointing methods”. I did a literature check and found two approaches - one in situ mold preparation using synthetic insulation powders like ptfe. Another was precast porcelain  bushings.  
We decided to go for Raychem jointing for 11 kv cables used in the campus network .  The total cost estimate was about 1.5 crore rupees, a bit high compared to the 11kv input voltage based design. This excluded the cost of the 66kv cable.  It was worth it ,as it stood the test of time. 
I discussed the proposals with Prof Rao. He agreed to the proposal and costs. So,  we floated a tender. We had another problem coming up here on the eligibility conditions in the tender. The condition was that the bidding company should have installed a 66Kv substation. Many local contractors had not worked on 66kv at that time  and were upset that they were excluded. Some were big ones, some had been working in the institute for some time. I was not prepared to experiment with inexperienced companies.66kv systems needed special skills particularly while joining two cables. So  I felt it was risky. So despite the estate officer's request, I rejected the request. Sympathy won't work here. 
Bombay Suburban was the lowest tender. The company was a famous one, operating half of Bombay electricity and had a few top officers who were our students. So evaluation was easy. It was approved by the power committee,  and the director. Order was issued. They were given the complete 66kv substation electrical panel work and a few new 11kv substations. The cable work was tendered separately. 
There were not many companies making 66kv cables. Siemens, Birla and Gloster were known names. When we floated the tender a new company from Kochi premier cables submitted their quote. It brought in a new problem. Let us discuss it  in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
31/08/24, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 463
“I recall these ideas in connection with my scheme of a Research Institute of Science for India, of which you have doubtless heard or read. It seems to me that no better use can be made of the ascetic spirit than the establishment of monasteries or residential halls for men dominated by this spirit, where they should live with ordinary decency, and devote their lives to the cultivation of sciences—natural and humanistic. I am of [the] opinion that if such a crusade in favour of an asceticism of this kind were undertaken by a competent leader, it would greatly help asceticism, science, and the good name of our common country; and I know not who would make a more fitting general of such a campaign than Vivekananda. Do you think you would care to apply yourself to the mission of galvanising into life our ancient traditions in this respect?”
JN Tata's  letter to Swami Vivekananda regarding the setting up of IISc.

I am wondering why I kept the cable component outside the scope of the main tender? The main reasons were that it is very expensive, so it will be better to buy it from manufacturers ,and  we can ensure quality and delivery time . This was found to be a good decision. 
We got responses  from three manufacturers, one of them not well known. But the problem was the difference in prices. The known companies quoted a little more than a crore of rupees for our requirement , the new company quoted less than 50 lakhs rupees. So the question was “ can we reject this quote from the not well known company?” We decided to investigate further to arrive at a decision.  
We decided to see the production facility. We went to Kochi to see the actual production. The extrusion machine was a new continuous extrusion machine . The insulation material was imported. So we were satisfied and gave the order. We saved about fifty lakhs rupees . They agreed to produce the entire length of 1.2 km in one run without break. So we didn't need a joint . We inspected the production . The company had to transport and lay the cable. 
One joint was needed at the institute entry point where we shift from the cable to an overhead line. We got Westinghouse engineers flown in to do the precast joint at the junction point between cable and overhead line. 
The entire work took one year. I inspected every equipment like transformers, circuit breakers, panels, 11kv cables etc. The transformer was manufactured by Cromptons in Mumbai,  11kv cables at Rewa, MP, panels at bangalore,  circuit breakers at Nasik etc. I visited all these cities and inspected the acceptance tests. 
By 1986, we commissioned the new substations and gave an operational contract to Bombay Suburban company. It was a job well done for me. The entire system is still working even now. 
There was one problem - an interturn fault occurred in the transformer after 15 months of service. So for a week we went to the old 11kv system. Fortunately it was still in usable state , not dismantled yet. So we could switch to it. After about a month , we got the transformer repaired. We decided to go in for a second transformer of 5 MVA so that if one fails, the other will be available.  
So now we have ideas on problem solving. It is not one dimensional like theory of Clayton or checklists of Atul Gawande or approximations. 
It has several aspects.
Discovery - find out the reality.
Identify the problem with its subcomponents.
Select goals and parameters like adequacy, maintenance, performance, cost, growth , longevity, reliability etc 
Decomposition - divide into steps
Estimation
Architecture
Design
Proper selections
Iteration
Consultation with users, experts, 
Optimization
So that completes my involvement in building  a new and stable power system for IISc. 
Greetings 
Dks
31/08/24, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 463
“I recall these ideas in connection with my scheme of a Research Institute of Science for India, of which you have doubtless heard or read. It seems to me that no better use can be made of the ascetic spirit than the establishment of monasteries or residential halls for men dominated by this spirit, where they should live with ordinary decency, and devote their lives to the cultivation of sciences—natural and humanistic. I am of [the] opinion that if such a crusade in favour of an asceticism of this kind were undertaken by a competent leader, it would greatly help asceticism, science, and the good name of our common country; and I know not who would make a more fitting general of such a campaign than Vivekananda. Do you think you would care to apply yourself to the mission of galvanising into life our ancient traditions in this respect?”
JN Tata's  letter to Swami Vivekananda regarding the setting up of IISc.

I am wondering why I kept the cable component outside the scope of the main tender? The main reasons were that it is very expensive, so it will be better to buy it from manufacturers ,and  we can ensure quality and delivery time . This was found to be a good decision. 
We got responses  from three manufacturers, one of them not well known. But the problem was the difference in prices. The known companies quoted a little more than a crore of rupees for our requirement , the new company quoted less than 50 lakhs rupees. So the question was “ can we reject this quote from the not well known company?” We decided to investigate further to arrive at a decision.  
We decided to see the production facility. We went to Kochi to see the actual production. The extrusion machine was a new continuous extrusion machine . The insulation material was imported. So we were satisfied and gave the order. We saved about fifty lakhs rupees . They agreed to produce the entire length of 1.2 km in one run without break. So we didn't need a joint . We inspected the production . The company had to transport and lay the cable. 
One joint was needed at the institute entry point where we shift from the cable to an overhead line. We got Westinghouse engineers flown in to do the precast joint at the junction point between cable and overhead line. 
The entire work took one year. I inspected every equipment like transformers, circuit breakers, panels, 11kv cables etc. The transformer was manufactured by Cromptons in Mumbai,  11kv cables at Rewa, MP, panels at bangalore,  circuit breakers at Nasik etc. I visited all these cities and inspected the acceptance tests. 
By 1986, we commissioned the new substations and gave an operational contract to Bombay Suburban company. It was a job well done for me. The entire system is still working even now. 
There was one problem - an interturn fault occurred in the transformer after 15 months of service. So for a week we went to the old 11kv system. Fortunately it was still in usable state , not dismantled yet. So we could switch to it. After about a month , we got the transformer repaired. We decided to go in for a second transformer of 5 MVA so that if one fails, the other will be available.  
So now we have ideas on problem solving. It is not one dimensional like theory of Clayton or checklists of Atul Gawande or approximations. 
It has several aspects.
Discovery - find out the reality.
Identify the problem with its subcomponents.
Select goals and parameters like adequacy, maintenance, performance, cost, growth , longevity, reliability etc 
Decomposition - divide into steps
Estimation
Architecture
Design
Proper selections
Iteration
Consultation with users, experts, 
Optimization
So that completes my involvement in building  a new and stable power system for IISc. 
Greetings 
Dks
01/09/24, 6:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: We are not aware if any project at once so opportune and so far-reaching in its beneficial effects was ever mooted in India, as that of the postgraduate research University of Mr Tata. The scheme grasps the vital point of weakness in our national well-being with a clearness of vision and tightness of grip, the masterliness of which is only equaled by the munificence of the gift which it is ushered to the public.
Mr Tata’s scheme paves the path for placing into the hands of Indians this knowledge of nature . . .
By some the scheme is regarded as chimerical, because of the immense amount of money required for it, to wit about Rs 74 lakh. The best reply to this fear is: If one man—and he not the richest in the land—could find 30 lakh, could not the whole country find the rest? It is ridiculous to think otherwise, when the interest sought to be served is of the paramount importance.
Prabhuddha bharata
Vivekananda response to Tata. 

There are many comments.
Prof Raja, principal , TCE comments on my uncle’s comment. 
“Sir, 
I don't know how to express it through words, your uncle did it. Thanks for the Janmashtami Wishes And wish you thr same.”
Thanks. Glad you find my posts useful. 

Aravind, TCS,  comments on post 461 belief systems
“Well said Sir. Faith is ability to trust God for bigger and impossible things while taking actions that are aligned with our belief system.”
Thanks . It is a good quote. 
Swamy , KSCST remembered my work on 66kv power supply to IISc.  
Thanks Swamy. 

My uncle's next comment:
“My  dear   nephew 

 Your   encounter   single-handed  with  top    Policy -makers   ( Chairmen , Directors and  Chief Executives)-  shows  your  conviction,  courage  and   persuasion,  You   could   jump  from     !! Kv  in  1967    to  66  kv  in    1985   ,   You   emerged  as  the   real  POWER   of  the   Power  Committee  of  ISSc,  It  is   not   a  small   step  but   a  giant   step   and   giant   leap     in  the   supply   of Electricity  to   an  active  Institute, 

Thanks   to   Dr,  CNR,    Rao   for    brushing  aside   Ramaseshan's   reluctance,     You  could   get   the   recommendation   of  Govindappa  for  66   kv,   It  is   amusing   that   Govindappa  silenced  his  own  master  Rudrappa,  the  Chairman   of   KEB,!  Finally,  CNR,  Rao  gave  the   judgment   for  the  installation   of    66  kv,   VICTORY  TO    THEE,   Sathyameva  Jayathe,

IISc  should   have   honored   itself    by  offering   you   a   valuable    award  for   putting   its  electricity    supply  in    firm   footing   for   years  to  come,  But  you  love   work  and   service   and   not  recognition  and 
  reward 

Ramakrishnan,  Uncle,    30  - 8 -  24”

Thanks. The motive was to be useful to my institute, nothing else. “Sarvajana hitaya “- “For the goodness  of all “ - is a belief I learnt from my elder uncle and follow it. You also learnt it from him and follow it. That is all. 

My cousin Mrs Rukmani Anantharaman  also commented on my work on IISc power supply. 
“Dear Anna,
Namaskarams.
Your initiatives in upgradation of  power supply to IISC are truly fascinating.It was like watching a documentary- as the process evolved,step by step! 
Being miles ahead of the rest,not only in the academic front but also in allied sectors, you foresaw the  ecxcessve power demands by IISC in future , found a solution , analysed the various  methodologies of achieving the goal , selected the most appropriate and latest approach, convinced the higher authorities about the positive results of  a huge financial investment in this project.The challenges were so many , yet you overcame them with your technical expertise and problem solving acumen and  arrived at a solution ,  hugely beneficial to the Institute and  has stood the test of time. Hats off!
Reminds me of' 'Bagheeratha
prayathnam'.
Also brings to my mind the Tirukkural
"எண்ணிய எண்ணியாங்கு எய்துப எண்ணியார்
திண்ணியர் ஆகப் பெறின்"
Translation - what is sought will be got as desired if only the seeker is determined

Regards.” 

Thanks for your great interest and  encouragement. 
I had a motive in detailing this activity. While engineers are problem solvers, unfortunately there was only emphasis on straight forward , simple problems. General problem solving was not taught or even looked at. I wanted to show the complexities in solving a major problem. It is not rational or mathematical, it is human based. You added determination and focus to my list. Thanks. 
Greetings
Dks
02/09/24, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 465

उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत प्राप्य वरान्निबोधत।

क्षुरस्य धारा निशिता दुरत्यया दुर्गं पथस्तत्कवयो वदन्ति ॥

“Arise, awake, find out the great ones and learn of them; for sharp as a razor's edge, hard to traverse, difficult of going is that path, say the sages.”

Katopanishad

The year 1986-1987 had a few events in my life. But most importantly , I started on my journey on diffusion of computer science knowledge across many colleges. I will describe a few episodes here. The period  also revealed my heart problem. 

I visited TCE for the first time after leaving it in Jan 1964. The visit was arranged by profs. Srinivasan and Santhanakrishnan. I gave five or six lectures on operating systems. I met Prof Nityanandan , principal. Later I became a member of the academic council . This membership continues till date with a break of about five years in the middle. I had to travel by bus to Madurai at that time . There was no direct train from Bangalore to Madurai. The college guest house was yet to come up. So I stayed in college house hotel.  I was also associated with TCE in most activities like faculty selection, lectures , training programs, conference talks, etc continuously over the next 38 plus years . I am very happy with my participation and contribution to my alma mater. I see a great improvement in the institution. Research , publications and sponsored projects, association with industries took primacy in the views of the management, principals and faculty. Prof Nityanandan started the research activity in the college. 
This involvement in the academic council started another path - curriculum development for autonomous colleges. I helped many colleges to modernise and balance their curriculum. I love my involvement with TCE. 


We shifted to another house E07 , a ground floor one with a garage.  
My next big involvement was with Malnad college of engineering,  Hassan. Both Prof Dharmananda Rao and K A Krishnamurthy got me into their institution. I had been visiting MCE from 1976 onwards for evaluation of KSCST student projects. But I got involved with a UGC network program first. Then we came up with a unique Masters program on computers and communications which got the appreciation of UGC . So I had to teach two courses for two to three years for their ME students. I had to travel by bus and stayed in a small lodge there. The ME program went off well. I was also involved by Prof Dharmananda Rao in faculty selections for several years. My association lasted for more than two decades. 
Then I was invited by Prof Prithviraj of MIT Manipal for a three day training program on Unix to his students. MIT didn't have any faculty in computer science at that time.  Later when Prof A Prabhakar became the principal, he started ME program and requested me to teach OS to the ME students. I visited several times to Manipal. Prof S Rajaram, my IISc colleague of sixties and seventies had joined there as a professor. 

I taught at NMAMIT , Nitte, a course on data structures. I stayed in karkala. I traveled by bus to karkala. It was Col BSGK Murthy met me in the bus stand and put me in their faculty stay area. I didn't like it. So prof Sridhar Hegde, the principal shifted me to a hotel. One day after lunch, I climbed the hill to see the tall Gomateshwara . On return, I felt a chest pain, but ignored it and gave lectures for two hours. The pain persisted. I didn't see any doctor. Afterwards , I realised that God saved me that day. I decided to see Dr Ramesh, a good cardiologist in bangalore.  He did a stress test and told me that it showed a problem with my heart. So I decided to go to Bombay to see Dr Nair . Dr Nair wanted a cardiogram done the next day . My wife and I stayed at the BSES guest house . Mr Hegde  of BSES arranged it and I did an inspection also. The angio was done the next day at the National hospital. The cardiologist said that there is a block in the right ventricular artery , but  I don't need  a surgery. He prescribed medicines which I continue till date. That included a beta blocker, aspirin and a bp medicine. These are in addition to other medicines I was taking. My children stayed alone in the house for nearly two days. My daughter managed it well. IISc didn't reimburse the heavy expenses incurred by me. 
If I look back at this incident, I am puzzled by my behaviour . I wasn't affected by this incident of chest pain, angiogram and medications. I continued my normal life, infact I increased my workload. Nobody in my family was bothered about my health condition. It affected me for a few months and afterwards , I forgot about it . I got routine medicines and took them regularly. It was a part of my life and my daily routine, no worries. I didn't worry about my health condition till 1999. That was strange. I am normally a worryingperson. But here i didn't worry. Why? I don'tknow.
 I find many worried about problems of BP or diabetes at a late age and hence my surprise at my behavior.  I don't know what made me to continue with my activities and not worry about my health. I behaved like a normal person. But I didn't ignore it. I reduced oil from my food, avoided ghee and had more veggies. I also tried for a few years amrithaballi stem kashayam.  
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
02/09/24, 5:38 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, You have been contributing to the engineering education field in general and CS education in particular, by going out of the way, even though it took a toll on your health. Fortunately, you took corrective actions on time. Now, based on your experience, what is your advice to take care of one's health? It is a very basic question with a straight forward answer, but most of us don't seem to be able to implement it.
03/09/24, 5:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 466
“This is a strange and amazing fact: we know every nook and cranny of the human body, we have catalogued every animal on the planet, we have described and baptized every blade of grass, but we have left psychological techniques to their empiricism for centuries, as if they were of lesser importance than those of the healer, the breeder or the farmer.”

Jean Piaget, “La pédagogie moderne” (1949).

Prof Bhandari requested me to give a series of lectures to their newly started  BE computer science students in BDT college of engineering at Davangere.  I accepted and lectured there. They had only one faculty member , Mr Subba Reddy , associated with this program. He joined us at CSA, IISc for his ME program. 

During this period, I conducted two programs on Vedic mathematics and Indian systems in the Sankar mutt, Chamrajpet and had a series of discussions with Sri Paramananda Bharathi swamiji. Srinath sastry assisted me. 
During the workshop, I met a great and sincere academic , Prof MN Channabasappa, head of Mathematics department at KREC, Surathkal. He invited me to KREC for a board of studies meeting. That was a very purposeful meeting. That was my first meeting and visit to KREC. Again that association with KREC and later NITK continued for more than two and half decades. My association with Prof MNC continues even now. 


I was selected to go to AIT Bangkok to teach a course on decision support systems during the summer of 1987. It was a great experience. I had exposure to the working practices of another institute. I had students from different nations. it was mandatory to put the ppt for each lecture along with notes in the library beforehand. I liked it. There were three Indians in the faculty - Prof Sadananda and Prof Malhotra. Prof Nanda from Roorkee   left in the middle and went back to Roorkee.I was invited by Prof Sadananda several times for dinner. Prof Malhotra , Prof Setty invited me for dinner. There were three of us from India teaching st AIT. Prof K Subramanya was from IIT Kanpur and another person from IIM Ahmedabad - I forgot his name. 

We stayed in the guest house. Vegetarian food wasn't easy. There was a food court . We got rice and dhal or some vegetables. Coffee was available in the faculty coffee room like that in the university of Manchester. I went to the department by 730 am and stayed till 4 pm. The library was very good . We could borrow a lot of fiction and even Tamil magazines. The department facilities were good. 
A few aspects of Thailand impressed me.
1.Disciplined work culture, no supervisors needed.
2.All electronic components needed to assemble a radio, tape recorder to a computer were available at affordable prices . They were sold even in normal street shops unlike Singapore.
3.All technical manuals for assembly of electronic devices , all computer manuals including MSDOS,  office etc were available in Thai language. It led to the progress of the country. 
4.Textile industries were modern with lots of production units for blended textiles.  Costs were low. 
5. Buddhist piety was common amongst most people. King was respected as God. 
6. King used the title Rama and used Sanskrit word processor.  
7. Economic Disparity was high. A few were rich. Most were poor. 

We were paid per diem charges by the embassy. So every month we went there to collect our per diem payments. 
I did lots of purchases as textiles and tailoring were inexpensive and fast. 
I met Prof Venkatasubramanian, who was the DPI in Tamilnadu and helped in the introduction of mid day meals scheme in schools. I met his son much later in 2000 when he was a GM at Indian bank. He came to see our computer centre at AIT. I told him that IIT madras has a good computer centre and there are many others like IISc,  TIFR having excellent computing facilities and he could have got much better ideas from them. AIT computer centre wasn't a good one. 
The experience was good. I had a good idea of Thailand,  its people , its Ramakien , emerald Bhudda , Ayuttaya and Bhuddhist and cultural  aspects . I brought Michael Jackson's music cassettes and a few more for my son . I also bought a tape recorder.
Greetings 
Dks
04/09/24, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 467
“You think that to change your beliefs, you have to adopt a new line of thinking, rather than seek experiences that make that thinking self-evident.
A belief is what you know to be true because experience has made it evident to you. If you want to change your life, change your beliefs. If you want to change your beliefs, go out and have experiences that make them real to you. Not the opposite way around.”
Brianna Wiest 

Dr Sanjay  Chitnis has a query:
“Dear Sir, You have been contributing to the engineering education field in general and CS education in particular, by going out of the way, even though it took a toll on your health. Fortunately, you took corrective actions on time. Now, based on your experience, what is your advice to take care of one's health? It is a very basic question with a straight forward answer, but most of us don't seem to be able to implement it.”

My response 
Well it is an important aspect to be learnt , understood and put into practice by everyone. But it is complex , not easy. 
Let me start with a disclaimer. I am not an expert , instead I am a novice. I am a big bundle of emotions. I am very sensitive, get upset very fast, get angry very fast.I am also not a follower of strict discipline. I am not a strong believer in faith. So I am not a role model. All I can say is that I was alert , and proactive. I write my problems so others learn from them . That is all my motive with my posts.
Let me address your question - how does one take care of one's health?
Actually, Hindu sages understood it very early. Our upanishads describe our body system well. It says it is a well connected system . Mind is part of the body. They emphasized consciousness and conscious living as essential. They defined liberation as the goal. Vedas talk about societal order, understanding and respect for nature , sharing and harmonious living. Vedas emphasize values like truth, non violence, Peace, sharing wealth, dharma , karma, yoga  , belief in ultimate reality etc. They emphasize on knowledge and wisdom. 
Vedas say humans are of different kind and suggested self learning, understanding and realization as the starting point for life. 
The importance of health is understood by most middle class educated people. I saw a newspaper story which says that it is not fiction books that are sold Most,  but self help self improvement books. There are thousands. I am not talking about productivity improvement, success in life, career advancement etc, but about better health and longer life. So awareness is there, but approaches are not there. 
First there is no one size fits all. Each person should study about himself and his 96 tattvas. Then create a cocktail of habits and actions. He or she should define principles for his or her life, goals,  purpose and happiness quotient etc. 
The answer is in each person's mind and in everyone's hand. It is intrinsic . 
The problems from the beginning of civilization till today have been:
We run our life in general like an automaton. 
We always react. We ignore our health. Only after a health issue  like high BP or diabetes occurs.
We look  for easy palliative solutions . 
We don’t plan for our health. 
Many don't understand their body and ignore signals. They are not aware of their body. 
Most lead a routine life. 
Most compare their life with others. 
Materialism dominates today. Aspirations are high. Wants and greed are common. Selfishness is rampant. 
We expect support from the government. 
We don't have a purpose defined life. We don’t ask what we want from our life? Is there a meaning in life?
Most importantly ,the strong  relationships  between disciplined life , habits, life styles, food, emotions, exercises etc is totally ignored by most. Health problems mean medicines and doctors. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
04/09/24, 5:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 467
“You think that to change your beliefs, you have to adopt a new line of thinking, rather than seek experiences that make that thinking self-evident.
A belief is what you know to be true because experience has made it evident to you. If you want to change your life, change your beliefs. If you want to change your beliefs, go out and have experiences that make them real to you. Not the opposite way around.”
Brianna Wiest 

Dr Sanjay  Chitnis has a query:
“Dear Sir, You have been contributing to the engineering education field in general and CS education in particular, by going out of the way, even though it took a toll on your health. Fortunately, you took corrective actions on time. Now, based on your experience, what is your advice to take care of one's health? It is a very basic question with a straight forward answer, but most of us don't seem to be able to implement it.”

My response 
Well it is an important aspect to be learnt , understood and put into practice by everyone. But it is complex , not easy. 
Let me start with a disclaimer. I am not an expert , instead I am a novice. I am a big bundle of emotions. I am very sensitive, get upset very fast, get angry very fast.I am also not a follower of strict discipline. I am not a strong believer in faith. So I am not a role model. All I can say is that I was alert , and proactive. I write my problems so others learn from them . That is all my motive with my posts.
Let me address your question - how does one take care of one's health?
Actually, Hindu sages understood it very early. Our upanishads describe our body system well. It says it is a well connected system . Mind is part of the body. They emphasized consciousness and conscious living as essential. They defined liberation as the goal. Vedas talk about societal order, understanding and respect for nature , sharing and harmonious living. Vedas emphasize values like truth, non violence, Peace, sharing wealth, dharma , karma, yoga  , belief in ultimate reality etc. They emphasize on knowledge and wisdom. 
Vedas say humans are of different kind and suggested self learning, understanding and realization as the starting point for life. 
The importance of health is understood by most middle class educated people. I saw a newspaper story which says that it is not fiction books that are sold Most,  but self help self improvement books. There are thousands. I am not talking about productivity improvement, success in life, career advancement etc, but about better health and longer life. So awareness is there, but approaches are not there. 
First there is no one size fits all. Each person should study about himself and his 96 tattvas. Then create a cocktail of habits and actions. He or she should define principles for his or her life, goals,  purpose and happiness quotient etc. 
The answer is in each person's mind and in everyone's hand. It is intrinsic . 
The problems from the beginning of civilization till today have been:
We run our life in general like an automaton. 
We always react. We ignore our health. Only after a health issue  like high BP or diabetes occurs.
We look  for easy palliative solutions . 
We don’t plan for our health. 
Many don't understand their body and ignore signals. They are not aware of their body. 
Most lead a routine life. 
Most compare their life with others. 
Materialism dominates today. Aspirations are high. Wants and greed are common. Selfishness is rampant. 
We expect support from the government. 
We don't have a purpose defined life. We don’t ask what we want from our life? Is there a meaning in life?
Most importantly ,the strong  relationships  between disciplined life , habits, life styles, food, emotions, exercises etc is totally ignored by most. Health problems mean medicines and doctors. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
05/09/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 468
“Over time, the animals that possessed even a rudimentary capacity to learn had a better chance of surviving than those with fixed behaviors—and they were more likely to pass their genome (now including genetically driven learning algorithms) on to the next generation. In this manner, natural selection favored the emergence of learning.”
Dehaene.    How do we learn.

Let me get back to proper living. 
Some common practices  we do in our life  are :
Non nutritious food intake. Erratic eating habits. 
Irregular habits of living like sleeping.
Tense behaviour in jobs
Worrying on small things and on the future. 
Fear of life itself , happenings in life,  other people 
Addictions - good or bad, excess is bad. Kural says even Nectar becomes a  poison if it exceeds the limit.
The greatest obsession today seems to be a mantra for success and wealth. Our wants have gone up and keep increasing .  We moved away from piety, humility, and harmony to a large extent. But there are some who practice these virtues. 
We disregarded nature in the belief that we are superior and can control nature. Living with nature is returning for some people. 

There are many doubts with many people who genuinely want to lead a healthy life. 
Some are listed below.
How and why do I live?
Can I control my emotions, beliefs, habits ?
Can I improve my health?
Are religion, prayer and puja important?
Should I build routine practices like proper time management, proper daily activities at scheduled time?
Will yoga calm my mind, remove my worries?
Can I be disconnected and different in my life from my neighbours, community and friends ?
Do I have the willpower to avoid undesirable food and drinks?
How do I control my anger , is it possible?
Can I lead an ideal life as defined in the vedas and upanishads in the context of present day survival, job and competitive requirements. What are the adjustments I should undertake?
What kind of balances - jobs, personal health regime, family responsibilities , society responsibilities, religious functions , our needs etc. It is a big jugglery  in life - should I practice in my life? This is a difficult question faced by most of us . We say that I am busy with my job and there is no time for exercises and family. I know people who don't have time to read . Time management is not easy. Or I am a foodie, my tastes are important   and I love to eat undesirable food like sweets, white rice, red meat, white bread or processed food or salty food etc. 
More importantly , I don't believe in many good practices- many didn't believe that tobacco was bad and many believe alcohol is good or coffee is necessary or I will get headaches. Many good practices are conjecture. So what should I follow?
Is there a set of proven dos and don'ts to be followed by a common person?
Is taking medicine for everything wrong? Do i have a role in deciding what medicines are good for me and what can be avoided by me?
When should I visit a doctor ? 
Is irregularity occasionally a crime? 
What is conscious living ? Is it desirable? Is it effective?  It is observed that many practices like yoga , meditation etc can not provide instant reliefs. So there is a lot of skepticism. 

So go through and find answers acceptable to you for your doubts. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
05/09/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 468
“Over time, the animals that possessed even a rudimentary capacity to learn had a better chance of surviving than those with fixed behaviors—and they were more likely to pass their genome (now including genetically driven learning algorithms) on to the next generation. In this manner, natural selection favored the emergence of learning.”
Dehaene.    How do we learn.

Let me get back to proper living. 
Some common practices  we do in our life  are :
Non nutritious food intake. Erratic eating habits. 
Irregular habits of living like sleeping.
Tense behaviour in jobs
Worrying on small things and on the future. 
Fear of life itself , happenings in life,  other people 
Addictions - good or bad, excess is bad. Kural says even Nectar becomes a  poison if it exceeds the limit.
The greatest obsession today seems to be a mantra for success and wealth. Our wants have gone up and keep increasing .  We moved away from piety, humility, and harmony to a large extent. But there are some who practice these virtues. 
We disregarded nature in the belief that we are superior and can control nature. Living with nature is returning for some people. 

There are many doubts with many people who genuinely want to lead a healthy life. 
Some are listed below.
How and why do I live?
Can I control my emotions, beliefs, habits ?
Can I improve my health?
Are religion, prayer and puja important?
Should I build routine practices like proper time management, proper daily activities at scheduled time?
Will yoga calm my mind, remove my worries?
Can I be disconnected and different in my life from my neighbours, community and friends ?
Do I have the willpower to avoid undesirable food and drinks?
How do I control my anger , is it possible?
Can I lead an ideal life as defined in the vedas and upanishads in the context of present day survival, job and competitive requirements. What are the adjustments I should undertake?
What kind of balances - jobs, personal health regime, family responsibilities , society responsibilities, religious functions , our needs etc. It is a big jugglery  in life - should I practice in my life? This is a difficult question faced by most of us . We say that I am busy with my job and there is no time for exercises and family. I know people who don't have time to read . Time management is not easy. Or I am a foodie, my tastes are important   and I love to eat undesirable food like sweets, white rice, red meat, white bread or processed food or salty food etc. 
More importantly , I don't believe in many good practices- many didn't believe that tobacco was bad and many believe alcohol is good or coffee is necessary or I will get headaches. Many good practices are conjecture. So what should I follow?
Is there a set of proven dos and don'ts to be followed by a common person?
Is taking medicine for everything wrong? Do i have a role in deciding what medicines are good for me and what can be avoided by me?
When should I visit a doctor ? 
Is irregularity occasionally a crime? 
What is conscious living ? Is it desirable? Is it effective?  It is observed that many practices like yoga , meditation etc can not provide instant reliefs. So there is a lot of skepticism. 

So go through and find answers acceptable to you for your doubts. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
05/09/24, 5:54 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir for your answer from the Vedic principles that brings a lot of clarity into though we know what is good for us, why we fail to accordingly.
05/09/24, 11:16 am - Sanjay Chitnis: <Media omitted>
06/09/24, 5:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 469
We are not simply Homo sapiens, but Homo docens—the species that teaches itself. Most of what we know about the world was not given to us by our genes: we had to learn it from our environment or from those around us. No other animal has managed to change its ecological niche so radically, moving from the African savanna to deserts, mountains, islands, polar ice caps, cave dwellings, cities, and even outer space, all within a few thousand years. Learning has fueled it all. From making fire and designing stone tools to agriculture, exploration, and atomic fission, the story of humanity is one of constant self-reinvention. At the root of all these accomplishments lies one secret: the extraordinary ability of our brain to formulate hypotheses and select those that fit with our environment.
Dehaene.    How do we learn.

So I feel that life is all about judgments, balancing between many essential activities  and a well reasoned  decision making. 
Life is a complex, uncertain  and highly balanced sequence of small and major actions . How do you decide on the importance of health - does it play a major role in your scheme? 
So the answer is a periodic learning, contemplation, review and self assessment. 

Happiness comes from giving , from a strong commitment to family , from a purpose in life. 
Let me come up with ideas for better health and life.  
Life is proportional to good health, contentment, purpose in life, sharing, cooperation, humility, helping attitude .
Health is directly proportional to  understanding body, understanding your needs, regular and good habits, nutritious food, exercises, yoga, meditation, good and caring friends, good balance, viveka, calmness, proper and timely actions, well thought out decisions, 
Health is indirectly proportional to bad habits like smoking and drinking, over eating, lazy living, poor time managements, greed and high ambitions, worry and anger, very high and tense moments, poor decision making, aviveka, 
Increasing the desirable aspects increases health. Decreasing the undesirable also increases health. 
We may take wrong decisions.  Find corrections. Build flexible approaches.
Take ownership of your life. You are responsible for your life. Others will help you. Your living affects your family and friends.      
Beliefs play a big role in our life. Our life is governed by hundreds of accumulated beliefs built by teachings by elders, observations and experiences. All beliefs are not provable. We make mistakes due to erroneous beliefs. Periodic assessment of beliefs is necessary for a good life. Fixed beliefs and mindsets are not very good. But beliefs are necessary. Don't change beliefs like changing shirts. 
We are not rational animals. We are not ideal people. But we need to define our life dynamics through principles and goals. These give directions. Children should be trained to have principles. Some principles like Speak the truth - Satyam vada - are absolute. Some like belief in god or surrender to god or visiting temples are left to the individuals to choose. Hinduism gives us many choices to live. 
Be aware. Be mindful. Try to listen to not only people but also the society and happenings everywhere.   Be conscious in taking major decisions. Use data carefully. Don't be a slave to data . Trust is needed in life.       
How do you change your practices to get good health? There is no one universal solution. incremental practicing works for many. Periodically take up one practice at a time. There is another approach - change everything at once. Sustainability is a key here. It is not easy to maintain all practices all the time.      

Actually in the early years, Hinduism developed many practices for harmonious and Ethical living. To create better understanding amongst all people, puranas were developed. People recited Ramayana for becoming an ideal person. Societal living and problems were explained through panchatantra and hitopadesha stories. A whole framework was built in a story form. Mahabharata gives a detailed description of different types of people - good and bad. But we ignored all these.
Greetings
Dks
06/09/24, 5:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 469
We are not simply Homo sapiens, but Homo docens—the species that teaches itself. Most of what we know about the world was not given to us by our genes: we had to learn it from our environment or from those around us. No other animal has managed to change its ecological niche so radically, moving from the African savanna to deserts, mountains, islands, polar ice caps, cave dwellings, cities, and even outer space, all within a few thousand years. Learning has fueled it all. From making fire and designing stone tools to agriculture, exploration, and atomic fission, the story of humanity is one of constant self-reinvention. At the root of all these accomplishments lies one secret: the extraordinary ability of our brain to formulate hypotheses and select those that fit with our environment.
Dehaene.    How do we learn.

So I feel that life is all about judgments, balancing between many essential activities  and a well reasoned  decision making. 
Life is a complex, uncertain  and highly balanced sequence of small and major actions . How do you decide on the importance of health - does it play a major role in your scheme? 
So the answer is a periodic learning, contemplation, review and self assessment. 

Happiness comes from giving , from a strong commitment to family , from a purpose in life. 
Let me come up with ideas for better health and life.  
Life is proportional to good health, contentment, purpose in life, sharing, cooperation, humility, helping attitude .
Health is directly proportional to  understanding body, understanding your needs, regular and good habits, nutritious food, exercises, yoga, meditation, good and caring friends, good balance, viveka, calmness, proper and timely actions, well thought out decisions, 
Health is indirectly proportional to bad habits like smoking and drinking, over eating, lazy living, poor time managements, greed and high ambitions, worry and anger, very high and tense moments, poor decision making, aviveka, 
Increasing the desirable aspects increases health. Decreasing the undesirable also increases health. 
We may take wrong decisions.  Find corrections. Build flexible approaches.
Take ownership of your life. You are responsible for your life. Others will help you. Your living affects your family and friends.      
Beliefs play a big role in our life. Our life is governed by hundreds of accumulated beliefs built by teachings by elders, observations and experiences. All beliefs are not provable. We make mistakes due to erroneous beliefs. Periodic assessment of beliefs is necessary for a good life. Fixed beliefs and mindsets are not very good. But beliefs are necessary. Don't change beliefs like changing shirts. 
We are not rational animals. We are not ideal people. But we need to define our life dynamics through principles and goals. These give directions. Children should be trained to have principles. Some principles like Speak the truth - Satyam vada - are absolute. Some like belief in god or surrender to god or visiting temples are left to the individuals to choose. Hinduism gives us many choices to live. 
Be aware. Be mindful. Try to listen to not only people but also the society and happenings everywhere.   Be conscious in taking major decisions. Use data carefully. Don't be a slave to data . Trust is needed in life.       
How do you change your practices to get good health? There is no one universal solution. incremental practicing works for many. Periodically take up one practice at a time. There is another approach - change everything at once. Sustainability is a key here. It is not easy to maintain all practices all the time.      

Actually in the early years, Hinduism developed many practices for harmonious and Ethical living. To create better understanding amongst all people, puranas were developed. People recited Ramayana for becoming an ideal person. Societal living and problems were explained through panchatantra and hitopadesha stories. A whole framework was built in a story form. Mahabharata gives a detailed description of different types of people - good and bad. But we ignored all these.
Greetings
Dks
06/09/24, 8:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Karnataka celebrates gowri puja. Wish you all a very auspicious puja. Let Gowri lead us on a well lit path making us aware of pitfalls and avoid them. 
Advance wishes for Ganesha Chaturthi.  
 we invoke Vigneswara  before the beginning of every task and seek his help to do our tasks correctly without any impediments.
But Chaturthi is a very special day. Tilak created a new task for Ganesha - national resurgence.  Let us pray Ganesha to take us away from evil talks, evil thoughts, evil actions and even make the daivic qualilties flourish everywhere. 
Let us pray to Gowri and Ganesha to bless us and our family and friends . Lokas samastha  sukhino Bhavantu. 
Greetings 
Dks
06/09/24, 8:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Karnataka celebrates gowri puja. Wish you all a very auspicious puja. Let Gowri lead us on a well lit path making us aware of pitfalls and avoid them. 
Advance wishes for Ganesha Chaturthi.  
 we invoke Vigneswara  before the beginning of every task and seek his help to do our tasks correctly without any impediments.
But Chaturthi is a very special day. Tilak created a new task for Ganesha - national resurgence.  Let us pray Ganesha to take us away from evil talks, evil thoughts, evil actions and even make the daivic qualilties flourish everywhere. 
Let us pray to Gowri and Ganesha to bless us and our family and friends . Lokas samastha  sukhino Bhavantu. 
Greetings 
Dks
07/09/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 470
“It takes a lot of courage to be a research scientist. It really does. I mean, you invest an enormous amount of yourself, your life, your time, and nothing may come of it. You could spend five years working on a problem and it could be wrong before you are done. Or someone might make a discovery just as you are finishing that could make it all wrong. That’s a very real possibility.”
Vera Rudin , Astronomer. 
Let me continue with our discussions.  
I said life is complex. Let us look at who is responsible for making life complex. Each person individually and the society collectively are responsible for this. 
Until  the middle of the 20th century, life was simple. People were happy, didn't have big ambitions and aspirations, were more spiritual and religious, Community lived together closely. Then money became our master. Technology became the second master. We continue to be slaves of technology, data , and materialism. Consumption was important, frugality was discarded. All our greed, ambitions, and opportunities made life tense and complicated. We became tense and sick. 
We believe that work is the main purpose of life and success means reaching a high position and great wealth or name. Happiness is secondary. Balance is upset. So we have made life a complex system. We can untangle it. Many are trying to reverse this trend. 
Let me look at different types of people. 
I categorise living into the following groups.
Those who live for the day. Have no big purpose. Don't worry about the future, Don't have ambitions. They have more time for family and society. Most village people belong to this group. 
Those who are at the next level. They have ambitions. They want to get degrees, educate the children , look for career advancements etc. They are not the EMI people. They are careful with money, save for the future, live within their means. They know the limits of their capabilities. So they have small wants and ambitions.  But they are a confused set of people with lots of mistaken beliefs and ignorant ideas. But they merge with society well. They look after their family. A majority of the lower middle class fall in this group. 
There are some who are work conscious. They want to grow fast , reach higher levels ,and ignore the family to some extent. They ignore society and even their health. They take partial remedies.  They may aspire for positions beyond their capabilities. They may spend beyond their financial limits. This is a varied group- leading to several sub categories. Some are OK, some are over worked, some adopt illegal methods to make more money, some have marital discord, many have health problems, most are tense and unhappy. Academic and professional successes don't matter in life. 
Those who maintain a balance between work and family , society, friends , and who were compassionate , considerate , helpful . This is a rare group , but the number is not small. 
There can be many more categories if you look at people’s behaviours, mental makeup, thinking, expectations  and actions. 
So everyone should have a serious look at the way people live, how they live, are they happy , are they healthy , etc and try to build the thousands of bricks that make their life. Health and happiness deserve a very serious consideration from one's childhood onwards. These should stay with us throughout our life . They should guide us. 
Actually, this is not an easy topic. It can lead to hundreds of opinions . Thanks to Sanjay for starting these questions.
Greetings
Dks
07/09/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 470
“It takes a lot of courage to be a research scientist. It really does. I mean, you invest an enormous amount of yourself, your life, your time, and nothing may come of it. You could spend five years working on a problem and it could be wrong before you are done. Or someone might make a discovery just as you are finishing that could make it all wrong. That’s a very real possibility.”
Vera Rudin , Astronomer. 
Let me continue with our discussions.  
I said life is complex. Let us look at who is responsible for making life complex. Each person individually and the society collectively are responsible for this. 
Until  the middle of the 20th century, life was simple. People were happy, didn't have big ambitions and aspirations, were more spiritual and religious, Community lived together closely. Then money became our master. Technology became the second master. We continue to be slaves of technology, data , and materialism. Consumption was important, frugality was discarded. All our greed, ambitions, and opportunities made life tense and complicated. We became tense and sick. 
We believe that work is the main purpose of life and success means reaching a high position and great wealth or name. Happiness is secondary. Balance is upset. So we have made life a complex system. We can untangle it. Many are trying to reverse this trend. 
Let me look at different types of people. 
I categorise living into the following groups.
Those who live for the day. Have no big purpose. Don't worry about the future, Don't have ambitions. They have more time for family and society. Most village people belong to this group. 
Those who are at the next level. They have ambitions. They want to get degrees, educate the children , look for career advancements etc. They are not the EMI people. They are careful with money, save for the future, live within their means. They know the limits of their capabilities. So they have small wants and ambitions.  But they are a confused set of people with lots of mistaken beliefs and ignorant ideas. But they merge with society well. They look after their family. A majority of the lower middle class fall in this group. 
There are some who are work conscious. They want to grow fast , reach higher levels ,and ignore the family to some extent. They ignore society and even their health. They take partial remedies.  They may aspire for positions beyond their capabilities. They may spend beyond their financial limits. This is a varied group- leading to several sub categories. Some are OK, some are over worked, some adopt illegal methods to make more money, some have marital discord, many have health problems, most are tense and unhappy. Academic and professional successes don't matter in life. 
Those who maintain a balance between work and family , society, friends , and who were compassionate , considerate , helpful . This is a rare group , but the number is not small. 
There can be many more categories if you look at people’s behaviours, mental makeup, thinking, expectations  and actions. 
So everyone should have a serious look at the way people live, how they live, are they happy , are they healthy , etc and try to build the thousands of bricks that make their life. Health and happiness deserve a very serious consideration from one's childhood onwards. These should stay with us throughout our life . They should guide us. 
Actually, this is not an easy topic. It can lead to hundreds of opinions . Thanks to Sanjay for starting these questions.
Greetings
Dks
07/09/24, 5:45 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, thanks for explaining this in detail. By the way all the quotations that you include are amazing!!
07/09/24, 5:46 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Happy Gowri Ganesha to you and your family!!
07/09/24, 5:46 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thanks for bringing the context of Tilak for national resurgence!!
08/09/24, 5:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  471
“No matter where you are on the pathway of your life, please don’t let the pain of an imperfect past hinder the glory of your fabulous future. You are so much more powerful than you may currently understand. Splendid victories—and outright blessings—are coming your way. And you’re exactly where you need to be to receive the growth necessary for you to lead the unusually productive, extremely prodigious and exceptionally influential life that you’ve earned through your harshest trials. Nothing is wrong at this moment, even if it feels like everything’s falling apart.”
Robin Sharma.   5 am club

Mr Gurumurthy has a comment. 
“Sir, you have managed very well the toughest part of life - a balance between the asks of the brain and the heart (please see the pictorial below). This is not possible for every one. I think, it has something to do with one's innate nature.”

My remarks
Thanks.  I believe strongly that my training and great upbringing during my childhood is the reason for my contentment  and knowledge giving life. 
When I was born , the ethos and the belief systems  in the society was very different from what it is today.
There was a  tremendous level of idealism and enthusiasm to usher in Rama rajya. It got into you and those beliefs became part of me. To say it in brief, - be happy, do something for the society and for all, let us work together for the progress of a new India.  That was the motto. Secondly, most items were not available.  There was a scarcity and people lived a very simple, frugal life without ambitions. Most lived in poverty. Rich were a very very small number. It helped me to create a big set of principles - high degree of scholarship, learning and curiosity, understanding, some degree of courage , flexible mind that is no fixed mindset, review and contemplation, frugality, reduced wants,no expectations, commitment, doing a job well, self dependence, low importance to money, reduce tensions, spiritual not religious outlook, etc- on which I based my life structure.

So my simple answers to your comment are
1.mind functions are mostly conscious ones.
2. Heart functions are mostly impulsive ones. 
3. Both can be irrational and wrong. 
4. Both depend on emotions and ego. 
5.We need to balance between the two . Move towards more conscious actions leaving routine daily actions to subconscious levels. Avoid impulsive actions. 

Mr Nagaraj has a comment:
“Thanks to Dr. Sanjay Chitnis for his query which has brought out more from your mind & fingers for the benefit of all  receivers of this post. 🙏🙏🙏”
Mr Gurumurthy has another comment.
“This post (469), to say in one word, is *extraordinary*. 🙏”
Sanjay Chitnis comments :
“Thank you Sir for your answer from the Vedic principles that brings a lot of clarity into though we know what is good for us, why we fail to accordingly.”
“Dear Sir, thanks for explaining this in detail. By the way all the quotations that you include are amazing!!”
“Thanks for bringing the context of Tilak for national resurgence!!”
Happy to know that most of you read the posts including the quotes. That is why I expanded the quotes. 
Thanks 
I need to emphasize here that most people in villages lead a healthy life. 

Greetings
Dks
09/09/24, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 472
“humanity discovered that it could increase this remarkable ability even further with the help of an institution: the classroom. Pedagogy is an exclusive privilege of our species: no other animal actively teaches its offspring by setting aside specific time to monitor their progress, difficulties, and errors. The invention of the school, an institution which systematizes the informal education present in all human societies, has vastly increased our brain potential. We have discovered that we can take advantage of the exuberant plasticity of the child brain to instill in it a maximum amount of information and talent. Over centuries, our school system has continued to improve in efficiency, starting earlier and earlier in childhood and now lasting for fifteen years or more.”

Dehaene    how to learn 

 Let me get back to my activities from  1987 onwards.
I will call the period of 87 to 96 , the era of AICTE.  Government of india made AICTE as a mandatory institution for technical education. All courses run by engineering colleges, and Pharmacy institutions had to be inspected and approved by an AICTE committee. It was mandatory. Prof Khanna became the chair of AICTE. 
It set up a new regional centre in bangalore. Mr Manoharan was deputed from the DTE office to become the regional officer. He ran the office with only temporary staff.
Initially, AICTE set up task forces for every state. Karnataka regional office was responsible for two states - karnataka and kerala. I was made a member of both states' task forces. We evolved an inspection mechanism. 
So started my travels to approve existing engineering colleges. I visited most engineering colleges in karnataka and kerala. It was another round of hectic activities.  I visited many places in both states . Later I visited colleges in Tamilnadu and Andhra pradesh also.  Normally, we visited two institutions in a day and later it became three due to heavy workload and time deadline  considerations. 
I was involved with these inspections  for more than a decade. That was my service to engineering education in the South. 
AICTE  approvals happened in two stages - the first stage for about five years concentrated  on approving the existing programs run by the colleges. We included one representative from DTE of the state and one from the university in addition to experts in the inspection team. 
After inspection, we prepared a report. We gave a list of deficiencies to be corrected by each college.  The deficiencies were mainly in the areas of faculty numbers, faculty qualifications, library facilities, computer facilities , lab equipment , classroom requirements etc.
 We found most private institutions had a severe shortage of faculty. They could not meet the students to faculty ratio of 15:1. The shortage was very  bad in the computer science area. Also, they didn't have many senior faculty like professors and assistant professors. But most private colleges in karnataka  like BIET, Davangere, SIT, Tumkur, Gogte , Belgaum, KLECE, Belgaum, MIT Manipal, SDMCET, Dharwad, MSRIT, RVCE , Bangalore had excellent facilities . The managements in most of these institutions , except a few, had enlightened persons in the committee. So the focus on quality was reasonable. Their faculty strength in traditional disciplines like civil, mechanical and electrical was reasonable. But most faculty were inexperienced. Faculty turnover was high.The institutions struggled to get post graduate qualified faculty particularly in ECE and CSE. 
 The overall situation was good with the seven aided colleges in karnataka . They had the full quota of faculty positions filled up, including senior positions. Most had a good experience and many got their ME or MTech degree through the QIP scheme of the central government.  
But it wasn't good with UVCE and the government run BDT college of engineering.  

The approval letter issued by AICTE mentioned these deficiencies and wanted these to be corrected.
These situations continued for decades and even became worse. So the quality suffered. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
09/09/24, 6:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 472
“humanity discovered that it could increase this remarkable ability even further with the help of an institution: the classroom. Pedagogy is an exclusive privilege of our species: no other animal actively teaches its offspring by setting aside specific time to monitor their progress, difficulties, and errors. The invention of the school, an institution which systematizes the informal education present in all human societies, has vastly increased our brain potential. We have discovered that we can take advantage of the exuberant plasticity of the child brain to instill in it a maximum amount of information and talent. Over centuries, our school system has continued to improve in efficiency, starting earlier and earlier in childhood and now lasting for fifteen years or more.”

Dehaene    how to learn 

 Let me get back to my activities from  1987 onwards.
I will call the period of 87 to 96 , the era of AICTE.  Government of india made AICTE as a mandatory institution for technical education. All courses run by engineering colleges, and Pharmacy institutions had to be inspected and approved by an AICTE committee. It was mandatory. Prof Khanna became the chair of AICTE. 
It set up a new regional centre in bangalore. Mr Manoharan was deputed from the DTE office to become the regional officer. He ran the office with only temporary staff.
Initially, AICTE set up task forces for every state. Karnataka regional office was responsible for two states - karnataka and kerala. I was made a member of both states' task forces. We evolved an inspection mechanism. 
So started my travels to approve existing engineering colleges. I visited most engineering colleges in karnataka and kerala. It was another round of hectic activities.  I visited many places in both states . Later I visited colleges in Tamilnadu and Andhra pradesh also.  Normally, we visited two institutions in a day and later it became three due to heavy workload and time deadline  considerations. 
I was involved with these inspections  for more than a decade. That was my service to engineering education in the South. 
AICTE  approvals happened in two stages - the first stage for about five years concentrated  on approving the existing programs run by the colleges. We included one representative from DTE of the state and one from the university in addition to experts in the inspection team. 
After inspection, we prepared a report. We gave a list of deficiencies to be corrected by each college.  The deficiencies were mainly in the areas of faculty numbers, faculty qualifications, library facilities, computer facilities , lab equipment , classroom requirements etc.
 We found most private institutions had a severe shortage of faculty. They could not meet the students to faculty ratio of 15:1. The shortage was very  bad in the computer science area. Also, they didn't have many senior faculty like professors and assistant professors. But most private colleges in karnataka  like BIET, Davangere, SIT, Tumkur, Gogte , Belgaum, KLECE, Belgaum, MIT Manipal, SDMCET, Dharwad, MSRIT, RVCE , Bangalore had excellent facilities . The managements in most of these institutions , except a few, had enlightened persons in the committee. So the focus on quality was reasonable. Their faculty strength in traditional disciplines like civil, mechanical and electrical was reasonable. But most faculty were inexperienced. Faculty turnover was high.The institutions struggled to get post graduate qualified faculty particularly in ECE and CSE. 
 The overall situation was good with the seven aided colleges in karnataka . They had the full quota of faculty positions filled up, including senior positions. Most had a good experience and many got their ME or MTech degree through the QIP scheme of the central government.  
But it wasn't good with UVCE and the government run BDT college of engineering.  

The approval letter issued by AICTE mentioned these deficiencies and wanted these to be corrected.
These situations continued for decades and even became worse. So the quality suffered. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
10/09/24, 5:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 473
“All young children share abstract intuitions in the domains of language, arithmetic, logic, and probability, thus providing a foundation on which higher education must be grounded. And all learners benefit from focused attention, active engagement, error feedback, and a cycle of daily rehearsal and nightly consolidation—I call these factors the “four pillars” of learning, because, as we shall see, they lie at the foundation of the universal human learning algorithm present in all our brains.”
Dehaene.     How to learn 

The second phase of AICTE approvals  started after about five years and  looked at the proposals for the starting of new colleges. This led to a flood of applications for starting private colleges and the starting of many new colleges. 
AICTE came up with a set of requirements or guidelines. I was involved in both phases,  though I didn't agree with the emphasis of AICTE on physical infrastructure , and facilities needed to start a college . The guidelines ignored the capabilities of the managing committee, its interest in education, its concern for quality etc. I strongly believe that a college should not be started because someone had money. We need to look at the educational ethos and motivation of promoters. But AICTE ignored that.
 Many managements who proposed new colleges were single owner concerns with the owner having money but with no idea of education or running a college. Some were civil contractors and some were excise contractors without any educational ethos, culture, ambience or motivation. Most private college principals were just dummy fronts.  This was one important component leading to the commercialisation of education and higher tuition fees. Capitation fees went up in different forms. AICTE had no say on fee fixation. That was in the domain of the state government.  AICTE didn't provide norms for admission. That was left to the state. 
This proliferation led to many major developments in the country. 
Let us look at them briefly. 
It opened up tremendous opportunities to many rural and semi urban and middle class students to study engineering particularly IT. It definitely provided employment opportunities to many. 
The colleges started in semi urban areas helped marginally in the development of that area. Infrastructure improved. 
These institutions quickly scaled up the production of lakhs of engineering graduates every year within a short period of 7-8  years from the starting time. This provided manpower to the emerging IT services sector. 
Most importantly,  private colleges became agile to move into the new emerging areas of computer science. They became the main source of providing manpower to our growing IT services industries. They definitely played a role in the success of Indian IT services leadership. This revolution went unnoticed by most faculty and even educationists and many eminent academics even at IISc ,IIT s and IIMs. It was almost a silent, autonomous , undirected revolution aided by IT companies. I didn't see a similar revolution when mobile communications became prominent in the country with 4G and now 5G. 
While private colleges were without dogmas, government colleges in Kerala were mired in many dogmas. The faculty there believed that private colleges are poisonous and should not be allowed in the state. This belief existed in other states , but was not strong enough.  When we went to approve the starting of private colleges in Kerala,  there was a strong opposition from teaching faculty and politicians. Even many vice chancellors were against the setting up of private colleges in the Southern states of kerala, Tamilnadu and even karnataka.  I was surprised at the rigid and outdated beliefs and myopic outlook of these  eminent educationists including some who advised the state government.  
Many private colleges excelled in education leading most state government colleges. State government colleges were lagging behind these private  institutions in Infrastructure,  equipments, agility , campus placements etc. Faculty in government colleges lacked motivation. They were doing a job , not academics. Their thinking was backward looking - looking at engineering as it was 50 years back. But the faculty of  government colleges felt they were superior to the faculty of private colleges. So an unequal  caste system was built by these segregation. It was unfortunate.
greetings
Dks
11/09/24, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 474
As you gain more and more access to your true nature, you will also spontaneously receive creative thoughts, because the field of pure potentiality is also the field of infinite creativity and pure knowledge. Franz Kafka, the Austrian philosopher and poet, once said, You need not leave your room. Remain sitting at your table and listen. You need not even listen, simply wait. You need not even wait, just learn to become quiet, and still, and solitary. The world will freely offer itself to you to be unmasked. It has no choice; it will roll in ecstasy at your feet.


The affluence of the universe , the lavish display and abundance of the universe is an expression of the creative mind of nature. The more tuned in you are to the mind of nature, the more you have access to its infinite, unbounded creativity. But first, you have to go beyond the turbulence of your internal dialogue to connect with that abundant, affluent, infinite, creative  mind. And then you create the possibility of dynamic activity while at the same time carrying the stillness of the eternal, unbounded, creative mind.
Deepak Chopra 




Many colleagues and friends questioned me “ why are you getting involved in this inspection and approval processes? It affects you.”
I also thought about it . So I feel this a good time to give my reasons for involvement in AICTE during the initial period. 
While my regular attention is towards my teaching, courses development, and research, I had a general focus - education from school level onwards. I know I can't do anything significant about the education status in the country. But I did whatever is possible like the training program for high school teachers conducted at IISc for about 20 years, the extension lectures program, computer science education diffusion in many colleges, and curriculum development in many universities. 
But I always kept my eyes open on the education scene from high school days. I was happy during the fifties when the country started thousands of schools, hundreds of colleges and many professional colleges providing opportunities to young persons with both school and university education. It opened up the country ,many were motivated to go for college education. If you look at the 1950 scene, only a few privileged in big cities got access to a college education. Most could at the best, get only school education upto 10th standard.  This starting of a large number of higher education institutions brought university education at the door steps of many. It was a great development.  
But then educational developments slowed down. From 1960 to 90 ,only a few engineering colleges were started in some states. Karnataka took two important decisions. It introduced the concept of aided colleges. We had 8 colleges that moved into the aided category. The government in sixties itself permitted private trusts to start both engineering and medical colleges. 
True , many of these colleges had a reasonable standard. Still there were two problems. 
First was the quality aspect. It was at a middle level, not improving in most colleges. There was no serious effort by the universities or colleges or faculty to find new avenues to improve the quality. If I say that IISc does this, they were diffident and say they can’t do it. The faculty invariably blamed the students . They said that their students are useless. I used to tell them that most colleges get 15% or more of distinction students. I said the college didn't do much for them. They got credit for the college. I also told them that most students can do 10% more than their syllabus. Teachers don't want to do extra work . Some even complained about KSCST projects saying it makes them do more. It was strange. Very senior faculty say they don't want a change in the syllabus. They are happy with the existing syllabus. They don't want to read another text book. This was my constant worry. Today we have NIRF ranking and many institutions want to get into this . It is a good sign. 
The second problem concerned  the evolution of new areas like computer science and communications. We will discuss it in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
12/09/24, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 475
“no institution has the wide acceptance to create values and direction for the majority of people. Markets in free societies are rapidly replacing governments and religious institutions as regulators of the highest authority, and markets perform without values; they do not converse in a human tongue. The arts can break new ground here, bringing human consciousness to bear on these flows of product and capital, energizing our interpersonal connections, and opening new doors for invention and practice. 
 Revolutionary shifts in the operational structures of our world seem to call for new definitions of who we are and what we are here for.”
Rosalind and Benjamin Zander.  “The art of possibility.”
The second problem is to move towards new disciplines by education institutions. Electricity was a developing area in the 19th century. Electrical engineering became an established discipline in the beginning of the 20th century. IISc started in 1909 with electrical technology as a new discipline, the first in India. In the first half of the 20th century, no new engineering discipline evolved.  But the second half saw major technological changes. Electronics started evolving with vacuum tubes quickly followed by transistors in the 1940s and 50s. Communications also became a new discipline .  While IISc started the ECE department in 1948, other engineering institutions slowly introduced ECE only by mid 70s, about 25 years of time lag. Similar situation existed with computer science . In 1985, no engineering college taught CS as a branch. The existing university system didn't help in introducing new departments.  
It was here that  AICTE came with a great help. It permitted the starting of new departments and programs. This resulted in most existing and new engineering colleges rushing to start CS programs without any faculty. While the US and UK started CS programs in 1965 , we started only by 1988 or later. 
AICTE facilitated a quick development of CS education in the country. It also scaled up the admissions by doubling it. It permitted IT as a separate discipline. That helped. Graduates were available when the demand for IT skilled engineers shot up. By  1998-99, the country produced about 3 lakh engineers. It was a great achievement. Private colleges played a big role in this transformation.  Their role deserves appreciation. Government institutions won't be able to  meet this increasing demand. Government didn't spend any money on building engineering colleges , private capital helped. 
These were the reasons I played a good role in AICTE inspections and saw CS culture grow in the south. 

Nagaraja has a question:
“Good morning sir. What is "NIRF" ranking? Please expand NIRF.
Thanks, with regards HSN”
I was talking about quality in education. The government of India took steps to improve the quality of engineering education first by making approval by AICTE mandatory. This was followed by the setting up of an accreditation body , NBA- National Board of  Accreditation similar to ABET. It made NBA accreditation mandatory. NBA used a rigorous method for evaluation. I was involved with the NBA evaluation  process for over a decade. The NBA was set up in 1994. 
Accreditation is a process of quality assurance and improvement, whereby a program is critically appraised to verify that the program continues to meet and / or exceeds the norms and standards prescribed by the regulatory authority from time to time.

NBA does not accredit institutions, instead, it accredits the programs offered by technical / professional institutions which have graduated at least two batches. 
Later many agencies came up with ranking of institutions and universities. Indian institutions got low scores in the ranking conducted by international agencies. So IITs refused to participate in that ranking. So the government in 2015 decided to rank institutions. It set up the NIRF- national institutional ranking framework-. It is going on every year ranking institutions in the country. 
IISc got first rank in university category all these years. Since we didn't have a BE program, we didn't get the first rank in engineering. It went to IIT Madras.  
Greetings 
Dks
13/09/24, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 476

“Standard social and business practices are built on certain assumptions—shared understandings that have evolved from older beliefs and conditions. And while circumstances may have changed since the start of these practices, their continued use tends to reconfirm the old beliefs. For this reason our daily practices feel right and true to us, regardless of whether they have evolved to keep up with the pace of change. In just such a way a business culture arises and perpetuates itself, perhaps long after its usefulness has passed. 
Zander.        Art of possiblity

Uday Singh, a serial entrepreneur has commented on the quotes in post 475
“I have been recently pondering over the ugly phase of capitalism that world is facing. Venture capital’s forcing founders to forget  original founding idea, going for IPO and thereby looting retail investors, wars in the world over for business goals of war industry, political considerations for obtaining vote banks behind all economic decisions!! Why??
The first lines of your post today answers - the first casualty in capitalism is the Value System - unfortunate but true!!”
 I am an admirer of Ruchir Sharma,  and his clarity of thoughts. But I read his book on why capitalism failed. I was disappointed .  He never considered the lack of moral values at all. We want government to make a law for CSR. True there are Tatas, Premji . But instead of giving donations, they should get involved in social activities. 
Thanks Uday. 

Let me continue with why I participated in AICTE inspections.  Another set of reasons that I joined the inspection teams is the fact that  my awareness on people and engineering education shot up because of these visits and meetings with managements.. 


These visits opened my eyes. I understood the state of technical education in many colleges. The dearth of faculty was striking. Most colleges didn't have enough qualified and interested faculty. Also managements didn't want to spend money of facilities. They don't mind spending money on buildings but not on equipments, salaries and consumables. Many faculty jumped jobs , moving from one college to another. Many principals were retired faculty from other colleges. That was OK with me because they were sincere , knowledgeable and honest. But they didn't have freedom to work and spend. I believe that principals can build institutions into a high quality and  reputed ones. Some of  the names of transformative principals  that come to my mind are Prof Prahlad Rao at MSRIT, Prof Holla at RV college of engineering,  Prof MN Channabasappa at SIT Tumkur, Prof KA Krishnamurthy at MCE and SSIT, Prof Viswanath at Gogte Institute of technology, Prof Ashok Shetter at BVB CE, and Prof Vrushabendrappa at BIET. 

The second aspect is the types of people I was meeting. Previously, I used to meet faculty only whenever I visited an engineering college. But now I meet Many management people. Most were tense. Some were antagonistic. Some were showing their power  both political and muscle. It was a front seat view of different kinds of humanity. Most felt we were their enemies. Only a very few appreciated our work. The names of people who appreciated the committee are Mr Rangarajan, Veltech engineering college, Fr Alex , Rajgiri institutions, Mr Vinay Hegde NMAMIT,  Nitte and a few more whose names I had forgotten. 
Many pleasant and unpleasant events happened during inspections including one headon car accident and a court case. AICTE officers run away when problems occur. 
Greetings 
Dks
14/09/24, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 477
“The learning itself may produce bad or good habits. There is a competitive plasticity in the brain to accommodate learnings of the individual. This also teaches us that not only is learning embedded in the brain, but that the brain itself is learning to learn! Amazing, isn’t it? Thus, it is our habit and desire to learn, to be curious, that influences brain plasticity.”
Gopalakrishnan Tatas.  Innovators 

I spent my life in the field of teaching , research, approvals, accreditation , curriculum development . Hence it is very appropriate to talk about the education scene in india. We discussed the Indian computer and IT scene a few times. 
I was thinking of writing about this for quite some time.
 Dr Gopalakrishna , director , Integra micro systems andcvice president FAER, sent me a detailed email asking my response to education, growth of technologies, use of tools in education, their impacts and their effects. It came at a very appropriate time. 

So  let me give my understandings on the  education scene in india for the past 75 years  and how it helped in the transformation of the country. I will also discuss the  impact of tools on education based on my experiences in teaching and lecturing in IISc, IIT, IIM and several hundred  universities, colleges , schools and industries for over 50 plus years . 
I have been seeing the effect of tools even from my school days . I also wondered about our indian  teachers and students ignorance of tools and their utility. Education, its purpose, teaching and use of teaching aids and tools were intuitively understood by people , not explicitly understood with clarity. This led to a lot of misunderstandings, wrong expectations.
We have to keep in mind the fact that India has been lagging in adapting technologies by decades in general. Further our education system is rigid with monetary constraints.  Research on education and teaching is minimal in Indian universities. School education is buffeted by fixed mind sets, ideologies and politics. We destroyed the long traditional gurukula system . The gurukula system existed in all villages, it permiated all layers from abstract knowledge, scriptures, to arts to artisan education. It handled a large number of disciplines and allowed for deep learning.  Macaulay destroyed it in one stroke. So we moved from a holistic spiritual and utilitarian system of education to a clerical training system.Let us keep these in mind and we should not feel that I make negative statements. 
Let me start with education first before going to teaching. 
My first question on education is
What are the purposes of education as I understood from my exposure and experience?
Education is supposed to have several purposes.
1. Improve visual, oral and language cognition.
2. Build capabilities for concentration, questioning , contemplation and focussing.  practice them.
3.Build beliefs, behaviours, etiquette, values , concerns for society, order, governance ,  nature, environment,  etc.
4.Build mindsets.
5.Provide for creating capabilities for  holistic approaches to life's many problems -  includes personal , family , job and society aspects of life- , impacts, multiple views,  analysis, problem solving , applications and innovation.
6. Provide holistic knowledge and skills .
7. Understand various aspects of life and living with interconnections to dynamic changes in nature, society, technologies etc.

Most teachers and parents and educationists  think that education is supposed to do only knowledge transfer. Is that premise correct? Does that thinking   need corrections ?
While talking about education, we refer  to formal education and ignore other aspects. We expect children to learn all the above listed life saving aspects only by intuitive approaches. Is it a good strategy?
Who will provide the missing purposes?
Greetings
Dks
14/09/24, 6:00 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Gopi has triggered the topic which is my life purpose now. And thanks for such a great clarity you are bringing to this topic. You are always our Guru, but I think I need to get your guidance more on the things I and other faculty are trying to do. We will be happy to meet you in person in any location and time convenient to you. Also I will like to invite you to REVA University in October to interact with our new batch of CS students on both what is engineering as well as real education and learning.
14/09/24, 6:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy to discuss.
We can meet here with coffee at our galaxy club or we can spend time with your faculty somewhere of your choice. 
But wait till 4 to 5 posts are out. 
Thanks
Dks
14/09/24, 6:21 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sure, sir, thank you!
14/09/24, 6:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Definitely I will talk to your students.
15/09/24, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 478
“Prof. Anjan Bose, who is a regents professor of power engineering at the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Washington State University, confirmed that age is no impediment to new learning, though motivation and determination can become impediments.
This view contrasts with the Silicon Valley obsession with young people, epitomized by Mark Zuckerberg’s comment at Stanford University in 2007: ‘Young people are just smarter.’ Author Pagan Kennedy writes, ‘There is evidence to suggest that late blooming is no anomaly,’ quoting a 2016 study that shows that ‘inventors peak in their late 40s and tend to be productive in the latter half of their careers’. Nobel winners apparently make their discoveries at an average age of fifty.”
Gopalakrishnan.      Innovators 

There are a lot of comments. I am happy and will post them later. Thanks for your interest. 
Education is a vast area of research , practices and reforms. 
I want to clarify my intentions to write these posts. It is not to find fault with our education system , our schooling , our teachers etc. Actually, I want to share my thinking about what is learning, how to learn, what is the teachers role , how tools helped in education and some possibilities of reforms and guidelines.  as well as clear some doubts. 
 Now to my second question :
     2.Is there a good , but not mandatory , sequence of learning?
The answer seems to be yes. 
First we understand how humans develop. 
A working body with a partially filled brain is the child. Throughout the life the mind develops, filled with a lot of learnings through perceptions, intuitive cognition, experiences , education , careers etc. A child starts developing habits , values , understanding of life and beliefs. It fills it's mind with thousands of beliefs. 
There is prelearning process. 
Most educationists agree that our mind is designed to learn. That is why you see many get a good learning despite the poor educational system. The 50% school dropouts that is happening  gives us another side of the  story. The reasons for dropouts are
Economic conditions
No relevance of school education 
No interest in learning
Let us look at the No interest condition. 
Many can't concentrate. They can’t sit for hours listening to teachers. They can’t calm and focus their mind. 
So such people need a first step of aided learning, not self learning. 
This comes through yoga and meditation. So that should be learnt at the young age preferably. 
Let me talk of my experience which is true for many. I didn't learn yoga and meditation formally in a school. But from the age of three, I was involved in prayers , sitting still, listening to slokas carefully etc  Later I saw and heard about meditation. These prayers and sitting still and focusing the mind on god helped me to get a good and prolonged  concentration and focussing. It created an interest in learning. 
Similarly, values, and conduct need to be learnt in the young growing age. 
Something a child starts learning is using it's senses leading to perception. Aural, touch and sight perceptions start developing. But interpretations of these perceptions are taught by parents and family. This and practises at home and the neighbourhood build our beliefs. We live by beliefs. 
So most of these first stage of learning are Non formal, happens at home and society. Here ambience plays a role. 
Sankaracharya felt that one basic learning is viveka - discriminatory learning. The question is how do we learn viveka. Olden days learning through puranas, ithihasas, panchatantra and hitopadesa made children to think and ponder and build viveka. 
Children by age start questioning everything. They pickup language skills at home. 
Viveka leads to unlearning of bad habits, bad manners, bad beliefs and misunderstood theories. This aspect of unlearning is mostly intuitive today. 
We accumulate beliefs on what is good, what is bad, what is right or wrong, what is true or false, what to do and what not to do, how to speak , etc. Some beliefs need corrections. Even some science learnings need correction. So unlearning and unlearning are as important as learning. They help one to develop viveka. Story telling by grandmas is minimal now. Youtube won't be able to replace that as it doesn't have viveka. Other  aspects like analysis, knowledge etc  are learnt later. We will look at that in the next post.. 
Greetings
Dks
16/09/24, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 479
“Lectures at Nalanda were given in a hundred different halls each day, Xuang Sang , Chinese traveller to India wrote, ‘and the students studied diligently without wasting a single moment’. He described the lecture halls, the stupa relic mound, five temples and 300 apartments and dormitories which housed the 10,000 monks and international scholars who gathered there.3 Between them they studied the texts of the different schools of Buddhism, as well as the sacred Vedas, logic, Sanskrit grammar, philosophy, medicine, metaphysics, divination, mathematics, astronomy, literature and magic. “
Dalrymple.  The golden road 
My third question in my understanding of education:
The focus here starts with the second stage of learning - mostly at the school going age.
What are the mechanisms  of education?
Sources and learning methods are multidimensional,  not unidirectional. One may get correct knowledge or erroneous knowledge,  good for values or bad or indifferent.  
1. Parental , neighbours and societal guidance and hand holding in the beginning to build values, habits, etiquette. This continues from childhood.
2. Development of good habits of reading, writing, questioning, etc - partly self learning, partly observations, partly instruction by elders and older children. Questioning is the first trait a child picks up. By age four, it keeps asking why and what on everything. But afterwards, we kill it. If this habit is encouraged, we will have a different kind of students , creative and innovative. 
3. Discussions with friends in the school or outside . Learn good communications capability and observations of behaviours , and manners. This is important even for studying and understanding school subjects. Many gain from peer learning. Group learning is another method. I have seen the effectiveness of peer learning not only from my school experience,  but from that of my students. One name is very striking in my memory. It is vadiraj Bhatt,  a student of NMAMIT,  Nitte whom I taught two subjects. Most students were mediocre in the class. I saw him explaining and teaching other students. Most will crowd around him. Later we experimented this with a formal student educator for Fluid mechanics at SIT Tumkur. The results were great. It motivated the other students.
4. Reading books, a very important habit missing even amongst our teachers. I talked to about 160 faculty in an engineering college individually about teaching and research. One question I asked each one is what books you read? The answer was striking. No one read any book. 
5. Learning from society through newspapers, general books, youtube, internet etc. . All these provide general knowledge. But it can be dangerous. It makes one  biased and builds hatred. One can become a slave . Here viveka is a necessary requirement for all users. My grandson used to watch TV and youtube from a young age of five. Some asked me “ is it good,? I found his curiosity and viveka were and are great. He wasn't influenced by them. He got relevant information, analysed them carefully and saved them. It was remarkable. I told many , even seniors, to listen to youtube talks. 
6.Learning from the ambience of the school , college, office.
7. Using libraries, labs 
8. Learning from mentors
9. Learning from class room teaching. This is primarily school education. Regimental learning helps in learning basic language skills and arithmetic initially. Later we get more knowledge in schools and colleges. But it is partial , text bookish, maybe incorrect and not fully understood. Here supplementary forms of learning from reading many books and intelligent boys and girls will help .
10. Keen observations and experimentation. 
11. Learning through self exercises like problem solving, assignments, experiments, literature survey and critique, project work 
12. Learning to use tools and use tools extensively
13. Time management , mind management, meditation, maintaining health etc.
13. Self learning. This is emphasized in upanishads as swadhyaya.
All the above constitute learning and education , not class room teaching alone. 

Will these learnings help a student to understand life, to know one's capabilities, weaknesses, attitudes and aptitudes?
 Answer is a big and loud no. These help ,may be, in  getting jobs and knowing the state of the people. There are gaps in the education processes  of a person.
Spiritual and moral learnings are ignored everywhere. Materialistic learning is dominant . Is this a good thing for a country where Rig veda talks of giving, sharing, ahimsa, peace, truth and order?. 
It is here that the attitude of teachers matters a lot. Many have negative attitudes. They tell students that they are useless. Exams ,I consider, are unjust capital punishments.
 Remember that in this stage the teacher is the main pivot. Still the significance of others is equally important. Ambience is a good accelerator for learning. 
Greetings
Dks
17/09/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 480
“Despite—or perhaps because of—our hoard of data, we are continuing to spew greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, pollute rivers and oceans, cut down forests, destroy entire habitats, drive countless species to extinction, and jeopardize the ecological foundations of our own species. We are also producing ever more powerful weapons of mass destruction, from thermonuclear bombs to doomsday viruses. Our leaders don’t lack information about these dangers, yet instead of collaborating to find solutions, they are edging closer to a global war.”
Yuval Harari    Nexus 


Let me pose the fourth  question :
What is the impact of formal education in india. ?
Provides a good foundation for STEM education. 
Allows an opportunity to all to get school education and college education. 
There is a concern to improve the quality of education.
Midday meals is a good scheme. 
 Focus is on examinations. 
Teaches mostly old concepts 
Builds a biased, divisive,  fixed ,non questioning mindset.
Mostly rote learning. But  rote learning is useful. But what about understanding? . Cognition is not good. 
Treats all students  at the same level. This affects both the bright and mediocre and leads to large failures. 
Builds wrong and rigid beliefs and mindset. Still tradition helps. Family bonding is reasonable. The culture helps many students. 
Provides partial knowledge . Most find English and mathematics difficult. Social studies and history are not correctly built. 
Visual communications in most cases and oral communications in some cases are poor. 
Many teachers are  with limited knowledge .
Intuition is recognised. This is a big credit. 
Purposes of learning and teaching not clear. 
Use of tools is minimal. 
Tools are ignored , neglected. 
Practicals and practices were ignored. Focus is on theory. 
Community, nature concerns are ignored, economy has the primacy. 
Technologies taught  are not the latest. 
Here is where reforms like NEP come in . But most reforms are good in theory and bad in implementation. 
That is a general averaged picture. Let me look at the shining stars and unsung heroes.
There are a good number of high quality institutions like IISc,  IITs,  IISERs, ISEC, and now NITs and many private institutions who strive for excellence.  Kendriya vidyalayas , navodaya play a good role in providing good education. Government of india has played a significant role here. 
Many private schools hundreds in number experiment with education. They had produced great artists and linguists. 
I have seen many schools experimenting a combination of the gurukula concept and modern school system to provide a dual education - values and traditions at one end and traditions at the other end. 
Similarly, there are thousands of unsung teachers who and knowledgeable and great teachers and they obtained  credit to their schools and colleges. I know several. We have ignored them. Even in the midst of the current situation of politics, commercialisation and low commitments, I  see many teachers in private and government institutions  working sincerely , learning every day, taking care of their students, improving their teaching methods, imparting a correct version of knowledge and building labs. They are idealistic, not greedy and very helpful to the cause of education. We ignore them. 
Otherwise, how do you explain the many scientists and engineers occupying senior positions in the developed countries. It is due to these ideal teachers.  Indians are the only persons from a developed country who built these nations. Family traditions , ambience , motivation from teachers and formal education produced these scholars and business man. 
But unfortunately we didn't produce Nobel Prize winners but for Tagore and CV Raman, and we didn't produce great innovators . After Sir MV we didn't have civil engineers of that caliber.  Why ? 
We are looked down by others and our country men and hence we  loose confidence.
 We need to be motivated by the positives and to improve ourselves by looking at the negatives.
Viveka means be positive, be aware of pitfalls, choose  the positives , avoid the negatives, listen to your inner voice  , analyse and  do things in a fair and just manner completely and correctly and be wise. 
Let me look at the role of a teacher next  - is it only class room lecturing?
Greetings and thanks
Dks
18/09/24, 5:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 481
“There exist transformational—practices that may “feel” illogical or counterintuitive to our normal understanding of how things operate. Their purpose is to initiate a new approach to current conditions, based on uncommon assumptions about the nature of the world. The history of transformational phenomena—the Internet, for example, or paradigm shifts in science, or the spread of a new religion—suggests that transformation happens less by arguing cogently for something new than by generating active, ongoing practices that shift a culture’s experience of the basis for reality.”
Zander   Art of possibilities 

Let us look at the comments. 
Mr P V  Joshi, ex GM, Indian bank, has a stream of comments with his anguish for improvements explicitly seen .
“Thanks DKS. Very valuable and practical thoughts.  
Learning good or bad , is in everyone’s blood 
Were humans better of when there was no formal education? Nature teaches more , but present days , at least in india , we are getting away from nature. Messaging platforms, have destroyed learning. Now most of us get tutored.   
At least , at present there appears to be no solution. Only time will tell.  Regards”

“Highly thoughtful view . Ethical standards and Vivek are different in different times.  Transitioning learning must be the essence teaching and learning process.  Most of our generation (65-85 ) had different learning process through family , society and schools. Now new social media learning skills need to   be developed . 
Is technology driving minds or vice a versa is a big question for me ? 
Regards.”

“In the days of rat races of Marks , admissions and packages, who is bothered about above described qualities? 
To bring back, it may take centuries . Pity”

Prof P Raja, principal , TCE:
“It’s the high time that we shall introduce the Indian Education Service (IES) similar to the administrative service in our country. This service personnel  will ensure and integrate the missing technologies and methods which are required for a teacher at all elementary, middle, high and secondary levels. With the present level of educational  administration at district and state level there will be no universal understanding of our educational system in our country.”

Mr Inderjit Arora, ex GM, PNB:
“Thanks for sharing this. Reference of Macaulay reminded me of Nalanda and also the movie OMG2 - I saw recently. Please see it , if you haven't.
Am not sure if NEP is really going to make any meaningful changes in our flawed education system.
Any thoughts 🤔”
Dr KNB Murthy , ex VC , who tried to reform in a college:
“Sir,  I read the article you sent. Amazing, it is, indeed!
Many many educationists are insisting for transforming our current education system for the HOLISTIC development of students - to bring physical, intellectual, emotional and spiritual tutoring under the canopy of scholastic and collegiate curriculum.
With my little experience, I have understood that any CHANGE when proposed will face following three phases:1. Resistance in the beginning 2. Humiliation when insisted 3. Acceptance and appreciation when dividends are seen.

Passion, Persistence and Perseverance will  lead to Metamorphosis of not only an individual but an Educational Institution !
I am sorry for my inordinately long message.
Namaste sir.... Dr. KNB Murthy..”

Aravind ex TCS:
“Well said Sir, about Viveka. 
Grandma’s love is the lighthouse that guides us through the dark nights.”

Mr Jacob of Zebra technologies:
“There was an interesting debate recently on the education system in India 
The notion was is it for seek employment or create employment 
General opinion is our system seems to be towards seeking employment!!
Just my thoughts..”
Dr Sanjay Chitnis:
“Gopi has triggered the topic which is my life purpose now. And thanks for such a great clarity you are bringing to this topic. You are always our Guru, but I think I need to get your guidance more on the things I and other faculty are trying to do. We will be happy to meet you in person in any location and time convenient to you. Also I will like to invite you to REVA University in October to interact with our new batch of CS students on both what is engineering as well as real education and learning.”
Bala Ajjampur :
“Sir, the last few posts have become one of my favourites. Insight from a teacher on the education landscape is invaluable! I am seeking permission from you to share the same with the rotary club that I am part of in Bangalore. I am part of their efforts of implementing programs on digital literacy at public schools in Bangalore.  It started in Bangalore and has spread to Hyderabad and Bombay.” 
Thanks to all. 
 Greetings
Dks
19/09/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 482
“In accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three kinds of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as I describe them.
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode of goodness.
That knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in the mode of darkness.
Chapter 18 - 19 to 22 verses
Bhagavad Gita. 

We can infer from the  comments posted in post 481 that education is a big subject, it affects everyone, everyone has an experience and exposure to education , everyone knows a lot about education and all views are not identical. That is the reason why I titled this section of posts as my understanding about education.  It may be even totally  opposite of others views and understandings. Let us realise that. I respect all opinions. 
Let  us look at the teacher's role. 
To understand the role of a teacher , we need to know the focus of teaching and cognition  and so we need  to ask a number of  queries:
   1.What is learning?
Gaining knowledge through senses, observations,Interpretations, experiences, discussions, understanding and absorption and later using those facts we learnt on many occasions in our life. Next one learns analysis methods, experimentation rules, formalism,  and problem solving approaches . As we saw earlier, we learn in many ways - from perceptions and observations, parents, family members , friends, society,  offices , experiences ,internal contemplation, internal assimilation,  and through formal learning in schools, colleges etc. We absorb all facts and methods and later apply them.
 Bloom categorises learning processes into 
the six aspects of learning, Remembering, Understanding, Applying, Analyzing, Evaluating, and Creating. 
      2.How does a child start learning? Is it born with some data and processing capabilities? 
A child is born with some  tools containing  some knowledge about survival and some actions and a learning and absorbing mechanism . Then it starts observations - by sensing, by crying, by hearing and later by seeing. 
It starts   building good data acquisition, interpretation  and processing capabilities.  Then it starts aping others. It is the process of learning actions. It accepts instructions from parents and follows them. That is followed by questioning to know each and every object in the house and outside. It builds a great  level of curiosity. So the initial five years of childhood is an intense period of learning. It develops cognitive - understanding- ability . It  starts picking up a language simultaneously. It apes and emulates others.  So contrary to our belief, the first five years are a period of intense learning , building many characteristics in a child like attention, curiosity, questioning, understanding, concentration, discipline, obedience,  habits , and behaviours. 
       3.Do these vary with each child? 
It seems that  many aspects are learnt  autonomously by all children  , but many other aspects  are learnt with inputs and stimulation from parents and others. So in some aspects , most children are the same, but in some others , they are different. The initial seeds may be different and that also matters. 
        4. Can all children pick up capabilities ? Looks like yes. 
         5.  Then why do there exist unequal levels of knowledge ? 
It is due to the differences in  ambience, habits, beliefs, family circumstances and many other factors. 
       6.What helps in learning ? 
Parental help is the initial acceleration factor. This is followed by others. But the most important aspect of learning is the attention and response from parents and others in the house including siblings. If their responses are not encouraging, the child will take longer to learn. 
    How does a person learn?
We have seen this before. 
      7. How does a person build the requisite  capabilities to learn?
This is the pre learning we talked about - concentration, questioning, contemplation, sharp observations , interpretations etc. 
     8. Are people unequal in their capabilities to learn?
This seems to be true. But they can learn and improve their capabilities. Learning period varies . 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
20/09/24, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 483
“It is because we don't know who we are, because we are unaware that the Kingdom of Heaven is within us, that we behave in the generally silly, the often insane, the sometimes criminal ways that are so characteristically human. We are saved, we are liberated and enlightened, by perceiving the hitherto unperceived good that is already within us, by returning to our eternal ground and remaining where, without knowing it, we have always been.”

Aldous Huxley

Let us continue with the queries. 
What is knowledge?
Knowledge is a collection of facts, data, procedures, concepts, principles ,actions, processes, solution methods etc.  obtained from many sources like reading books, talking to people, listening to talks and lectures, reciting, classroom lectures , from job, from experiences etc. Facts may be true or false .
Bloom’s Taxonomy is situated in the four types of knowledge:1. Factual Knowledge of terminology and details, 2. Conceptual Knowledge of relationships among pieces of concepts or theories,3. Procedural Knowledge of processes and methods of theories and problems, and 4. Metacognitive Knowledge of learning strategies and processes.
Engineering needs additional types of knowledge : 1.visual knowledge 2. Imaginative knowledge  3. Design knowledge 4. Analysis and detailing 5. Experiential 6. Professional 7. Societal and users  knowledge 8. Innovations and applications knowledge
Computer science looks for algorithmic knowledge , meta knowledge about thinking and intelligence in addition. 

Who creates the additional knowledge? 
So many people - teachers, researchers, professionals, and even normal people - create knowledge ,but  a good part is fake. 

Is knowledge full of facts or fiction or biases, or opinions or false?
Yes. It is tough today with social networks. So our discrimination should help us  in resolving this. 
How do you use and apply knowledge ? How do you use discrimination - between good and bad , between correct and incorrect, between yes and no, between logical and illogical ?
This is not easy to answer. There are many ways like learning, talking to others, reading, analysing , using tools, searching the web , internal meditation , etc. A lot of practice is needed here. 
What are the methods used to analyze a given set of facts?  How do we get a specific set of facts for an analysis? Does an analysis depend only on the given or chosen set of facts or will depend on other facts also? 
 We need to  ponder about the need for the following traits: 
Move out of the frog in the well approach - 90% do that.
Have multiple views like birds eye views, worms views. 
Assume that  multiple solutions are possible. 
Look for external impacts. 

Should we focus on only known formal methods of analysis like mathematical, logical or scientific axioms based or extend it to practical, anecdotal, experiential, intuitive, heuristic, or follow the vedantic principles as enshrined in uttara mimamsa? 
Today we are in the unfortunate situation of the dominance of formalism. Engineering was descriptive in the fifties ,but has become mathematical now. Computer science was descriptive in the beginning , and merges algorithms with design and concepts. Programming is partly methodologies, partly algorithms. This needs a discussion to reduce biases and with AI, there is an urgent need for alternate strategies. 
Is wisdom dependent on knowledge or perceptions or discrimination called viveka  or actions or analysis, or  thinking or behaviours or a combination of all these? 
Wisdom is a cocktail of one's characters and values, fairness and maturity, judging capabilities, awareness and just decisions. 
Wisdom is a long process sharpened by correct , known and hidden knowledge, experience,  maturity , kindness,  and spirituality. A wise person  starts with an integrated picture of all these components , then arrives at a mature decision and based on various scenarios of the decisions and an analysis, he or she provides advice to others . Many times , lots of internal processes like intuition play a great role in wisdom. A wise person has good control of his emotions, mind , body and habits . That is the first requirement. A wise person is known by his actions and acceptance by people and is governed by fairness.
Can we ignore human emotions , beliefs and behaviours in performing formal analysis?
What is understanding and how does one understand ?
Bloom's  verbs for understanding
Classify, Confirm, Contrast, Convert, Decipher, Defend, Designate, Differentiate, Equate, Estimate, Examine, Express, Extend, Extrapolate, Generalize, Give Examples, Group, Infer, Interpret, Order, Paraphrase, Predict, Rephrase, Rewrite, Sort, Specify, Substitute, Tell, Translate. 
Greetings 
Dks
21/09/24, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 484

“From the fact that I know that I exist, and that at the same time I judge that obviously nothing else belongs to my nature or essence except that I am a thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence consists entirely in my being a thinking thing. And although perhaps . . . I have a body that is very closely joined to me, nevertheless, because on the one hand I have a clear and distinct idea of myself, insofar as I am merely a thinking thing and not an extended thing, and because on the other hand I have a distinct idea of a body, insofar as it is merely an extended thing and not a thinking thing, it is certain that I am really distinct from my body, and can exist without it. “          Descartes 

Should a teacher know the answers to the above questions before he becomes a teacher? 
It is desirable to understand these dimensions to become a good teacher. 
I have been mulling over these questions for a major part of my life.  I should say that there are many answers to these questions, not always one correct answer and many are contradictory. Also these are not questions only for philosophers and cognition science researchers. The solutions are many , a solution will work for some and may not work for another. Some answers affect us teachers. Some worry us. Some make us change ourselves and our teaching and improve our teaching. 
Let me start from the teacher's end - what is  her role?
The main focus of a teacher is to improve the cognition of a student in a discipline and also in a holistic manner. So cognition is the pivot on which a teacher should base his or her work. So let us look at cognition next. 
What is cognition?
Cognition is associated with the mind . It deals with knowledge, it deals with the processes of acquiring knowledge in several ways. It deals with verifying the correctness of facts .It deals with understanding the meaning of knowledge through perceptions, imaginations, interpretations, thinking, discussing , analysing and grouping and categorizing the  acquired knowledge through certain characteristics of facts and with the help of logic . It deals with creating a framework of connecting  facts and building a huge network. It deals with many methods of processing knowledge. It produces new facts , this is crucial. 
It refers to deep understanding in all aspects. It refers to the continuous development of mind. It sharpens the mind , Improves the actions of the mind in taking decisions and creates a better awareness of universe and life. 


Cognition is a term for the mental processes that take place in the brain, including thinking, attention, language, learning, memory and perception. These processes are not discrete abilities – they are a raft of different, interacting skills which together allow us to function as healthy and intelligent adults.
Examples of cognition include paying attention to something in the environment, learning something new, making decisions, processing language, sensing and perceiving environmental stimuli, solving problems, and using memory. 
Cognitive processes help us in improving our capability to process our known  knowledge , acquire new knowledge through several ways of learning and even try to look for unknowns. While nature didn't provide borders to cognition, we built barriers and disciplines hoping to bring in order and simplicity. 
Cognition, knowledge, communications , human mind  and learning are related. 
Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary study of mind and intelligence, embracing philosophy, psychology, artificial intelligence, neuroscience, linguistics, and anthropology. Its intellectual origins are in the mid-1950s when researchers in several fields began to develop theories of the mind based on complex representations and computational procedures.
Students face many problems in their college life. Solving such problems requires doing things with mental representations, such as reasoning that you still need five more courses to graduate, or deciding never to take another course from Professor Tedium. Cognitive science proposes that people have mental procedures that operate on mental representations to produce thought and action. Different kinds of mental representations such as rules and concepts foster different kinds of mental procedures.

More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
22/09/24, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 485
“The sciences have developed in an order the reverse of what might have been expected. What was most remote from ourselves was first brought under the domain of law, and then, gradually, what was nearer: first the heavens, next the earth, then animal and vegetable life, then the human body, and last of all (as yet very imperfectly) the human mind. “
  Bertrand Russell, 1935

Let me expand my understanding of Cognition from a teacher's perspective. I describe below the many stages of cognition and also how teachers may help students to reach that stage.  It  includes the following stages:
1.Understand the principles , categories, characteristics , objects and definitions . Explain and interpret an observation . Many concepts and definitions need much better explanation. Most teachers  don't explain the second law of thermodynamics in detail. Let me give a simple example for a clear and distinctive definition. Whatapp uses clear and delete to remove contents. What is the difference? These two aspects  - concepts and definitions - are key to understanding. Knowledge construction starts with objects, classes,relationships and principles governing those objects. Intuitive understanding is not enough. 
Explanations can be simple or complicated or abstract, can be  mathematical or even heuristic. It should kindle the curiosity of the learner to go deeper.  
I was a party to one useful practice followed by AIT Bangkok when I taught there. Copies of all reference books  and all lecture ppt copies should be sent to the library in advance so the students get an idea of the lecture, prepare them for the lecture and not put up a blank face and mind. 
2.Understand the significance, surrounding theory . Use additional facts, give many examples. Create interest and awareness. Use tools, visualisation, experimentation, analogies, computer simulation . Visualisation was experienced by me during my school days. Our teacher did a simple experiment to show how air is needed for combustion, how carbon dioxide is produced after combustion.  Many more demos were done during my  school days particularly with my science studies. Many demos are staying with me vividly even now.  These were very effective in understanding. Similarly , my mechanical engineering teacher took several hours before a class drawing in detail a diagram of the device , boiler or engine to be discussed in the class. Prof AR Vasudevamurthy taught us materials science and he used the epidiascope to show us chemical structures .  This was before over head projectors came into use. 
Communication is important here for correct transfer of knowledge from teacher to student. For instance , we need to differentiate between  an isolator ,a load break switch and a circuit breaker in electrical engineering, between a hub, a switch and a router in networks and between a job, task, process and thread in operating systems. Language comes in here to play an important role. Follow Panini - who says the purpose of communications is to transfer the thoughts of the teacher to the mind of students without  error or loss of data and with clarity and without ambiguities. A language should follow this principle. Remember English is an ambiguous language with few cases based grammar.  So explain such sentences.    This becomes the first level of guidance for a teacher. Two aspects are important to follow. One, a  Teacher speaks slowly, precisely and clearly so the students receive the information correctly  and absorb it in their mind. He or she uses simple sentences. Secondly, the  teacher gives correct , complete and holistic knowledge to the students. This is the first basic requirement of a teacher and a learning process.
3.Understand and prove the validity of the fact. This is tough today. When I learnt social studies in high school, the teacher's views didn't coincide with ours and also the book's views. His bias was visible.
 Fake information is rampant now. I find many textbooks have errors. Some faculty were writing books on programming languages and they were lots of errors in them. 
4. Understand how to do analysis based on the fact or principle. This can be mathematical or statistical or logical or experiential or approximated or modelled or simulated . It can be simple or complex. One uses many techniques and algorithms here. This is the analysis stage. 
Next is the application stage to be seen in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
23/09/24, 4:31 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 486
“We think of trust as precious, and yet it’s the basis for almost everything we do as civilized people. Trust is the reason we’re willing to exchange our hard-earned paychecks for goods and services, pledge our lives to another person in marriage, cast a ballot for someone who will represent our interests. We rely on laws and contracts as safety nets, but even they are ultimately built on trust in the institutions that enforce them. We don’t know that justice will be served if something goes wrong, but we have enough faith in the system that we’re willing to make high-stakes deals with relative strangers.
 Trust is also one of the most essential forms of capital a leader has. Building trust, however, often requires thinking about leadership from a new perspective.”
Frei and Morriss.   HBR - 10 best on trust

    5.Understand additional about the principle or object under discussions like - 1. where it can be applied,2. how it affects other elements, 3.how it affects nature, and natural resources and environment,4. is it beneficial for humans, animals, insects and plants,      5.does it help the poor, 6. how does it impact with economy, 7.how to use it, 8.what are the sub principles that can be derived from this ,9. how is it related to other principles and objects, 10. what are the overall effects,          11.what are  the future directions, 12.what are the unsolved problems etc. Also look at the linkage of this principle to other principles. So in short, prepare a checklist for every principle. 
That will help a student to get 360°views.  It will clarify quite a number of  doubts and create a better cognition. This will motivate students, if told in a story form or told as a sequence of anecdotes and events that happened. 
My science teacher in the school took us to a factory nearby to show how air bale of cotton is compressed by a hydraulic Brahma press. It showed us how energy comes from water. During my 7th standard, I visited a hydro power plant at Papanasam. These two created interest in me in engineering, electrical engineering and energy. That showed me one direction - to go for engineering education, the first in my family. 
My physics professor Mr Ramaswamy at TCE Madurai used to discuss many of the 12  aspects mentioned above. He talked about transistors when we had only vacuum tubes in the lab and our radios were built with vacuum tubes.  His discussions in the class  in 1960 and 1961  made me look at electronics and computers with great interest. That motivated me and started my journey into computers. There were no computers in India then. Similarly , I was interested in economics and planning in 1960 and wrote my first article on planning in the college magazine. That was due to listening to a  talk by Schumacher followed by very intense discussions with many including Mr  V Sankaran, MLA of Madurai then.  I still cherish the daily lunch time discussions on many topics like the future of engineering, our trends in industrialization etc with Prof Krishna Kutty Menon. This habit started from the first year of my engineering. I learnt a lot in these discussions. I got a lot of interest in many areas and started reading more books. If I look back, those discussions were my foundations of scholarship and learning. 
Let me give an example of deep learning. Let us  say that  we  are talking about a tree. You should list out the benefits. Ask the students to calculate the amount of oxygen it will generate for say about 50 years. Compare it with oxygen production costs in a factory. Similarly ,calculate carbon credits, water storage , soil enrichment and cost them. A cost of a tree will be more than 3 million rupees. Students will understand this better. Build a concept of a forest on top of this and include biodiversity also. You also make the students feel that it is disastrous to treat natural resources of negligible cost or free. Economists do that. See the impact , you would have strongly imprinted the overall aspects of a tree and forest.  You may next look at the number of trees cut per year purely for firewood used in cooking. I used to say that everyone consumed a tree per year. It hits you hard. 
The methodology for holistic understanding  is to pose a series of questions. The questions should ignite their curiosity. You will understand their thinking processes and thereby your students better. 
 I used to ask a few questions in each lecture. It was useful. I knew whether students understood the topic, whether they could think and answer a deeper question and how to plan and  continue with the next lecture. 


Next is the problem solving stage. Students need to pick up tools and techniques required for problem solving and apply them. 

       6. The next step in cognition is to apply the acquired knowledge  to solve problems . There are hundreds of problems occurring in our life and a student should be able to see whether and where a particular  principle can be applied and what is an appropriate principle - by searching. A teacher  should accept non formal methods also. Appreciate if your students come with another approach. I used to ask a question on concurrency handling by the operating system of a computer and discuss some ways of doing it. If a student came up with an alternate solution , I gave him bonus marks - about 10% in the exam. That is encouragement. Let me also discuss a case of discouragement. 
A BE student living in the campus came to me one day with a problem in programming. He said that the teacher gave one solution. He tried another approach. He asked whether his approach is correct. I went through his algorithm and said it is correct. After some months , he came and told me that  he got zero marks as his answer was scored wrong by his teacher. I have come across  several such incidents including a few involving my children.  Most teachers don't accept the basic axiom that there are several possible solution methods for a problem. For them, the textbook is the Bible, nothing exists beyond that textbook. Teachers need an open mind. 
This understanding is crucial for engineers , scientists and even managers. 
More in the next
Greetings
Dks
24/09/24, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 487
How do leaders build trust? By focusing on its core drivers: authenticity, logic, and empathy. People tend to trust you when they think they’re interacting with the real you, when they have faith in your judgment and competence, and when they believe you care about them.
Frei and Moriss      HBR 

Let us continue further on teacher's role in providing knowledge and improving cognition.
     7.Look deep and find inner meaning in the  observations made by you everyday  - there are many  hidden facts out there in nature, in people, in consumption, in the society, in behaviours , in governance, etc . As they say, “ God is there everywhere in a small twig or in a pillar “, I feel that knowledge is there everywhere , we need to observe it and feel it and derive new knowledge. 
For example we know that  Prof. CV Raman observed that sea color was blue or black, a simple observation. But he spent days and nights on this , conducted simple experiments and came up with the fact that light is not a ray of a single frequency , but it is a lot  pipes   consisting of radiations of several frequencies and color is represented by frequencies. When light rays are bent  in a prism,  you see some dominant colors. He overturned Newton's corpuscular theory and expanded Huygen’s Wave theory.  We can even go further. Upanishads insist on learning about not only the knowns , but also the unknowns. They also look at unknowables according to Swami Vivekananda. 
These pipes of  rays provide not light alone, they carry  energy over millions of kilometers. In addition, they carry conscious knowledge. We use radio waves for communications. We see sound being carried in the atmosphere over a short distance. We receive signals from deep space billions of kilometers away. See their great potential . It helps to understand hard consciousness.
   8. The next step is to try to find answers to many such observations and  questions. Many random events like cyclones can be analysed and explanations found. Many are working on landslides for many years. These approaches will lead to research.  
   9. The next step is innovation. Today's focus for a teacher is less on knowledge transfer and more on clarifications,  discovery, inventions and innovations. 
    10. The next step is detailing , how to design, how to build, how to connect, how to integrate, how to simplify and how to improve the performance. This is engineering.  
   11. Then the next step is to show the principle is wrong , it is not universal, it does not work under some conditions . Even text book statements can be shown wrong. This critique is an essential part of a teacher. If you see the earlier Indian Acharyas, they will take a concept and argue whether it is true or false. We are familiar with advaita and dvaita discussions, but there are thousands of topics discussed. There were many groups of scholars debating throughout their life. 
Let us see the greatest example of a clear minded teacher in two people. One is Yajnavalkya. He didn't accept his Guru teaching Yajur veda. So he created a new form of yajur veda - Sukla Yajur veda, a remarkable achievement. In Brihadaranya upanishad, he followed  the debating methods to explain concepts. He debated with 1000 scholars including a woman to collect a gift of 1000 cows from king Janaka. He also debated with his wife Maitreyi in that upanishad. These are shining examples of critiquing . Sankaracharya also  debated with Mandana mishra for a week. He had even debated with a kapalika , considered to be a lower caste. He debated with Bharati, a woman. He debated on various topics -  from brahman, to the vedanta to the philosophical aspects of truth, to Jnana, Anjana, Maya  and viveka.  to bhakti to ritualism - fight with nambudiris in order to perform the last rites of his mother-, to sanyasam, to sadachara- good conduct -, and even normal life. This shows that such debates were common amongst scholars. There were hundreds of places in India like Pataliputra, Taxila, Benares , Darbhanga , etc where such debates had taken place for thousands of years. Even Mahabharata has many debates including the famous Bhagavad Gita and yaksha samvada. Our education system totally ignores this mode of learning and cognition.
A teacher is as good as the level of cognition he or she has and how effectively he or she transmits that  understanding and thought processes to the students and how he or she  improves the cognition  over years through analysing, thinking, questioning, looking for multiple interpretations etc. 
Good Cognition means having  holistic, correct and deep 360° knowledge . 
You see that there are many levels in cognition, many methods to improve cognition, and many tools. AI tries to understand these aspects and to build machine cognition. Machine learning is the first step. 
Actually cognition was first recognised as a subject of research in the fifties by the famous  AI quartet -Allen Newell, HerbertSimon, Marvin Minsky and McCarthy.  
Cognition was understood by Indian vedantists long ago . It is discussed in upanishads and the Darshana  shastras like Samkhya, Vaiseshika , yoga , nyaya and vedanta. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
25/09/24, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 488
“to learn is to progressively form, in silicon and neural circuits alike, an internal model of the outside world. When I walk around a new town, I form a mental map of its layout—a miniature model of its streets and passageways. Likewise, a child who is learning to ride a bike is shaping, in her neural circuits, an unconscious simulation of how
the actions on the pedals and handlebars affect the bike’s stability. Similarly, a computer algorithm learning to recognize faces is acquiring template models of the various possible shapes of eyes, noses, mouths, and their combinations.”
Dehaene.    How to learn?

From our earlier discussions , one thing is clear that teaching is not just a classroom lecturing , without bothering to know whether students' understanding improved or not. 
So cognition needs to be fully understood by a good teacher. 
There are several ways and methods  to improve knowledge transfer and  cognition levels of students to be followed by teachers.  These were developed and practiced by many teachers.  Some methods  are given below. 
Effective communications - clarity, slow speaking, simple Sentences,  repetition, recap. 
Explanation with the help of pictures , demos, experiments, visits to sites, and actual doing by students. 
Check the absorption rates and levels of students and provide extra inputs. This is done by problem solving and applications , designs and experiments. Quizzes also help in this. Ask the students to summarise in a note of one or two pages what they learnt in a week. It is very effective. 
I followed a set of standard practices in teaching like 1.planning the full course, 2. Prepare syllabus and contents and references 3. Read, understand and  Prepare lecture notes 4.plan the assessment types like large programs, problems assignment, term paper , tests etc. 5. Modify teaching based on students' capacities and question them in every lecture. My delivery of talks is good and clear. My writing is clear and visible.   6. Explain definitions carefully. 7. Don't hurry. 8. Set timeliness for subparts of submission 9.prepare a balanced question paper with easy and difficult parts . 10. Grade generously. Don't fail students. I have a very good record here - a few S grades and only 2 F grades in my entire career. 

I normally gave a large programming assignment in the beginning of my course and that too at a time when computing resources were scarce. I made my students write a full assembler program, a small concurrent operating system and a full database application covering ER diagram,  data modeling, storage, implementation but not using any standard DBMS package, and testing with a few queries. All these were good training for my students. I kept some milestones and time limits for stages of work. I announced this in the beginning of the semester itself. This will appear in the final exam as a question. This motivated many.  When i discussed this aspect of large programming exercises in many engineering colleges and NITs , their CS faculty didn't want to follow this practice. We produced small problem solvers,  not engineers.     
 Similarly I introduced time management and process planning in my courses. In my software engineering course , students go through analysis, design , coding , testing stages for their assignment.   I visited many colleges for AICTE inspection and later TEQIP audit/ mentoring or for lectures and used to visit the computer labs. When I saw students programming on the machine directly, used to scold them and said “ please do the analysis and coding on paper, do a dry run and then move to the machine. The situation was that the students got limited machine access of a few hours every week. 
Tutorials and labs are important,  but we just trivialized them. Go for meaningful use of these two components of a course. 
I use the term paper route for the students to learn many aspects - literature search, planning and time management,  structuring a report, report writing, deep learning on a specific topic, building a focus on a topic.  This is a standard practice in all my courses. Some have written research articles. It sharpened the students.
Use visualisation tools. We started with ohp and moved to ppts and later to animations. Use computational tools. Simulation is very useful to understand the behavior and working of a real system. Use python exercises to solve large problems. 

Create  interest in students  through analogies, jokes, examples, experiences, anecdotes and real life situations. It is very effective. 
Create self learning through assignments 
Use the internet and search engines effectively to access information and critique them . 
Conduct discussion sessions. 
Encourage students to listen to online lectures, youtube videos and khan academy lessons . Ask them to discuss it in the class room. 
A Teacher should understand the many categories of imparting education that exist. 
Greetings
Dks
26/09/24, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 489
“IN studying the Perennial Philosophy we can begin either at the bottom, with practice and morality; or at the top, with a consideration of  metaphysical truths; or, finally, in the middle, at the focal point where mind and matter, action and thought have their meeting place in human psychology.
The lower gate is that preferred by strictly practical teachers —men who, like Gautama Buddha, have no use for speculation and whose primary concern is to put out in men's hearts the hideous fires of greed, resentment and infatuation. Through the upper gate go those whose vocation it is to think and speculate—the born philosophers and theologians. The middle gate gives entrance to the exponents of what has been called * spiritual religion*—the devout contemplatives of India.”
Aldous Huxley 

There are many categories of people who are  knowledge givers. These are 
Teachers
Researchers
Book writers 
Mentors,
 coaches
Trainers
Guides
Influencers
Guru
Upa adhyapak , adhyapak 
Acharya. 
The differences amongst these categories are 
:    1. the level and width of knowledge acquired by them , - a guru has even futuristic knowledge . He is more of a generalist . He may impart knowledge to many. Most gurus talk about the human systems, the society, one's life complexities, how to live, religious and cultural significances, spirituality, mind and emotions control, happiness etc. He knows humanism , is a selfless and very wise person, not greedy , not interested in worldly wealth, but interested in his disciples. He is not a time dependent person . 
An Acharya has a very large, indepth knowledge , has interests in building a good society by pointing out and if possible removing the evils plaguing the society. He leads a selfless , pious and simple life. 

Whereas a teacher handles many students. He or she is not interested in the personal problems of a student. He or she is highly constrained by time, a defined curriculum, and piecemeal teaching. He or she has knowledge in a small domain. His or her general knowledge and wisdom does not come into teaching. Their personal experiences are hidden and separated from professional experiences. There may not be lots of contact with individual students.  Teaching is a job or profession, a living.  
   2.the areas of knowledge,- a researcher has deep knowledge in a focussed area. A trainer has a lot of both indepth and undefined knowledge in a specific domain. It is highly utilitarian. He can train a student in specific skills, in areas like artisanship, sculpting, arts, games, etc. They are useful in a society. 
    3. the depth and understanding of knowledge,  - As said earlier, it varies from person to person. Many need to learn continuously. 
      4. the ways of acquiring that knowledge, 
This is where we see differences. A guru learns through self realization. A teacher goes through formal education. A researcher learns from peers . A trainer and coach learn from keen observations, and discriminations and through varied experiences.
    5. the level of expertise, the manner of delivery and reaching out to the students, the ways of communication and handholding etc.
     6. A coach is a lot more involved in knowing the capabilities of a person and using it effectively. He should know the defects and failures of a person and apply corrections. He is more closely involved with the people he is coaching. He is dynamically involved with his work. Success is his only goal. It is a tough and intensive job. Successful coaches move from baseball coaching to business coaching. 
     7. What about mentors? Mentors are supposed to be knowledgeable in a general sense, know the world, have good habits, have great interest in the upbringing of their mentees, do not have any monetary interest. The relationship with the mentee is due to a personal bond. They play a great role in the life of their mentees. A mentor may take care of one or two youngster at a time. They know the characteristics , behaviours and habits of their mentees.  They provide guidance and leave a mentee when he or she is neither interested ,nor listening and acting on the advices ,  or think that they  have grown bigger than the mentor. Mentorship is very effective and very useful at a young stage. A mentor can't mold an adult easily. It may lead to conflicts. Mentor mentee rapport is essential. Mentee should realise the importance and knowledge levels and empathy of a mentor. 
Influencers are a new category playing a big role in today's society. They are mostly biased, do not have good ideals and intentions and can destroy children and society. They dominate in youtube, are greedy and destroy the goodness in the society. They even peddle fake information. Even religious influencers have changed and are greedy and highly biased. Most influencers have a very low level of knowledge. It is a big business. We need to guard our children from them as they are becoming a big menace to the society. 

I consider most education dept persons as administrators and don't include here. 
Greetings
Dks
27/09/24, 5:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 490
“If you were asked to name the human brain’s greatest achievement, you might think first of the impressive artifacts it has produced—the Great Pyramid of Giza, the International Space Station, or perhaps the Golden Gate Bridge. These are great achievements indeed, and our brains deserve their very own ticker-tape parade for producing them. But they are not the greatest. A sophisticated machine could design and build any one of these things because designing and building require knowledge, logic, and patience, of which sophisticated machines have plenty. In fact, there’s really only one achievement so remarkable that even the most sophisticated machine cannot pretend to have accomplished it, and that achievement is conscious experience. Seeing the Great Pyramid or remembering the Golden Gate or imagining the Space Station are far more remarkable acts than is building any one of them. What’s more, one of these remarkable acts is even more remarkable than the others.”
Daniel Gilbert stumbling on happiness 

Let me pose the questions of Dr Gopi on tools. 
“We have seen a lot of technologies and related tools in the last 2-3 decades including the Internet, Email, Mobile phones, tools like PowerPoint, Course material for distance learning, availability of online courses etc. We are going to see a lot more AI-influenced tools/products in the next 2-3 years. As a Professor involved in teaching and Research at a premier Institute, did you see a multiplier effect in terms of the quality (of outgoing students) and the quantity ( like the number of research students a Prof can handle) these tools/technologies could produce? Going further, how do you think AI and related tools (LLMs etc) can help teachers in general and educators involved in Tech education in particular?

A related question - Has the adoption of these tools and technologies resulted in any significant improvement in primary and high-school level education standards?”

My response
Teachers have been using  tools from the beginning - sand, blackboard , demos are early tools. 
But the past 30 years have introduced many new tools like PCs , internet, search engines like Google . This has seen a great change in the education scene.


Tools like powerpoint presentations ,when used correctly, have definitely improved the students capacity in receiving the  information contents correctly. Diagrams also had better visibility. We used overhead projectors and epidiascope from the sixties onwards. 
There was an adjustment problem in the pace of teaching. The pace  became faster and students' absorption level got  reduced.
But the 90s improved our reach to students. It is no more restricted to the class lecturing hours only. You can reach anytime. The magic was email. I saw research students in US complaining about their free times being encroached upon  by their guides. Demands also increased. But emails established a fantastic communications line. We could reach other faculty in many countries. I reached  many friends . 
But the greatest aid was Google search engines. It provided fast access to knowledge . The open access concept started evolving.  True the search engine provided a lot of junk and fake information,  but it provided an awareness of what is happening everywhere in your field. Slowly faculty started sharing their lecture plans and even ppts on the web. This started the open access revolution. This helped research students to know many things - who and which Institutions are working in his or her area, what are they working on , references of their work like papers and reports. They could establish contacts. Networking was easy. 
Most students benefited from the digital tools. Their cognition improved. 
Wikipedia was also helpful to know some facts and references. 
India got into tools not in a big way and also with decades long time lags. Students didn't use simulation in most places. Matlab became dominant only in the 21st century. Software tools were not available in most institutions. Even DBMS packages were not available in most institutions.  Most institutions  purchased a compiler and a few pirated software. Even word processing started late. 
But two  factors are clear .
Tools usage abroad was and is very good in most North American and European universities and schools. But tools are rejected by most Indian educational institutions. In the nineties, I advised and  assisted the directorate of technical education , Karnataka to buy software for civil, mechanical and electrical applications and even software for drawing , all these for polytechnic and ITIs and funded by the World Bank. Unfortunately, the usage was minimal. Even IISc didn't buy many tools. Even TCS moved into software engineering, operations and process management only in the late eighties. There were very few software companies producing application tools ,but the quality was poor. 
But the impact of tools on education was significant. I will discuss this later. 
More in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
27/09/24, 12:10 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: The weeds grew darker green to protect themselves, and they did not spread any more. The surface of the earth crusted, a thin hard crust, and as the sky became pale, so the earth became pale, pink in the red country and white in the gray country.
In the water-cut gullies the earth dusted down in dry little streams. Gophers and ant lions started small avalanches. And as the sharp sun struck day after day, the leaves of the young corn became less stiff and erect; they bent in a curve at first, and then, as the central ribs of strength grew weak, each leaf tilted downward. Then it was June, and the sun shone more fiercely. The brown lines on the corn leaves widened and moved in on the central ribs. The weeds frayed and edged back toward their roots. The air was thin and the sky more pale; and every day the earth paled..

From Steinback
Neel I found a reference to ant lions here.
28/09/24, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 491
“the last thing we’ll say on empathy is this: If you do nothing else to change your behavior, put away your phone more frequently. Put it truly away, out of sight and out of reach, not just flipped over for a few minutes at a time. You’ll be amazed at the change in the quality of your interactions and your ability to build trust.”
HBR on trust


Mr Joshi of Indian bank promptly responds to my posts . He has a comment on the teacher's use of tools.
“Are not teachers responsible for non use of modern technology tools , in teaching. ? Teachers seems to have forgotten to unlearn old and learn to adopt new technologies and methods”
I agree with the above comments to some extent.  The two comments, though valid ti a large extent , are too sweeping and universal. While there are many teachers in an institution who have fixed minds and are ignorant of tools, there are also some in the same institution who are aware of tools and not only use them, but also encourage students to use them. Most institutions fortunately provided some facilities for students to learn. So students were smart and learnt to use the tools.  The greatest impact of this is seen in the IT services industry using millions of these students. The dominance of IT industry and its survival is because of these institutions and students. It proves my point. There are several lakhs  of teachers, engineers, professionals, bankers , administrators in india who don't use tools , who have a fixed mind . Is it possible to correct all or some ? 
Thanks for your great comments.
Let me get back to our topic of use of tools in teaching. 
To understand the usage of tools in India , I want to divide the period 1960 to 2024 into three eras. A comparison of three eras will be helpful to know the impacts of digital tools. 
Let me look at era1 - the period 1960 to 1980
Let us call it the pre digital era. What are the educational scenarios then?
Let me start with the best- IISc.  We had great class rooms with huge glass boards, a big luxury ,I enjoyed at IISc.  It was a pleasant experience to teach in PE 302 and 303. 
We had many good labs in all engineering departments and modern equipment and facilities. So lab work particularly for researchers was more than adequate. The central workshop with more machines than a machine tool industry along with departmental workshops provided great fabrication facilities.  Most facilities were very modern , latest ones. Teaching competed with the best universities in the west. Our syllabus revised every year was and is modern , current and relevant to a large extent. 
We also had an excellent library.
Most teachers had limited knowledge in their subject. They couldn't access most books. They accessed research papers only after two to three years.  Normally a teacher used only one textbook and no reference.  Many books by Indian  authors started coming at that time. But we never used them at IISc.  So teaching was not easy . 
But I was lucky.  Institute had a great library with lots of books and journals dating to 1910 onwards. Many original books by Newton, Russel, Maxwell etc were available. Similarly , there was a book on computers prepared by  the staff of Burroughs corporation, a then famous computer manufacturing company. Then by mid seventies,  many books based on IBM came up. So I could teach my course on computer systems using these books. But I taught several courses like OS, data structures, compilers , simulation , computer applications in power systems,  computational methods etc without books. But I tried to refer to many books and papers for each course. 
When I taught my database course for the first time ,I used CJ Date’s book. It was useless - more than 50% dealt with the outdated hierarchical database system and very little on relational model. 
Still IISc had a lot of books. 
Let me give one example - Prof Dharma Rao left for Concordia university. He requested Prof Ramakrishna Iyengar to send a complete list of books in electrical engineering held in our department library. That shows we are better off than many universities in books and journals. Still quite short of a good teacher. 
We had an ammonia printing unit which produced many copies of diagrams and drawing, an epidiascope and a cyclostyling machine. They were very useful. Then we got a slide projector. 
Though we didn't have a computing facility - we had enough analog computers- , we could use computers elsewhere. I used the computer at NAL , at HAL and at TIFR Bombay.  I could do extensive computations using these machines, learn the nuances and differences in these machines and develop my courses based on them. Our students used these computers. I used to write programs for many faculty. 
That was all the tools we had - not bad, most institutions didn't have even 5% of books thst we had and had no journals.
Our library was open to all. A lot of people used our library.
Let me look at the second period 1980 to 2000 - digital preparation era. The situation on tools improved.

Greetings 
Dks
29/09/24, 5:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 492
“Employees in high-trust organizations are more productive, have more energy at work, collaborate better with their colleagues, and stay with their employers longer than people working at low-trust companies. They also suffer less chronic stress and are happier with their lives, and these factors fuel stronger performance.”
Paul Zak 
Let me look at the second era 1980 to 2000. This is the digital growth era, hardware like microprocessors, PCs,  servers , etc followed by software both system software and applications and followed by networks. Internationally it saw explosive growth but we were slow in the first ten years and picked up pace in the next ten years. 
Internationally, students used PCs effectively - most programming work was done on a computer . They started solving large problems. They used to spend several hours every day on a computer. Initially, the students in the west used hundreds of PCs installed in their university. They did serious simulation work and worked throughout the night hours to complete assignments. Assignments became tougher. The total work culture changed. The students became good programmers and problem solvers with great analytical skills and led the industry in designing and building not only complex systems software but also hundreds of applications. The programming culture moved from universities to schools. This was a great period for the west. Floppy disks became the common media for storage and found many uses and stored many applications software. It was a great convenience. 
But the situation in india was different. We concentrated on teaching hardware. Programming was not considered important. Even in hardware we were not near the western students. They used to design a VLSI chip and get it fabricated in a foundry as part of a course assignment. We taught about 8085 for decades. Colleges bought 8085 processors and had a lab for microprocessors. 
But the 90s saw the beginning of an explosion. C became usable along with unix. Most colleges bought a unix based  server with many PCs connected to it. Computer science became a favorite discipline in most colleges. So the students picked up programming in C and became available for the IT industry like TCS  that was fast becoming a leader in the International level. So absorption happened fast. 
But what tools did a teacher use ? It was mostly the overhead projector  and transparency sheets and pens. They were expensive. So the ohp was sparingly used. It didn't reach most colleges. Most had one or two ohps in a college, not enough for teaching. But we all used that mode for displaying our lectures. I might have prepared thousands of pages of these sheets filled with my lectures, my talks and paper presentations. We also used slide projectors. I made hundreds of slides on some topics . I used to carry a slide projector to schools to give a talk on computers. These two were the major tools. While students were trained to use PCs,  faculty usage was minimal. 
But PCs found use in sending and receiving emails. So communications became great. My children used my built 286 PC to send emails and receive reply from abroad. I don't remember to have send emails to many faculty in india. Ernet was a great infrastructure to help us in our communications through emails. Most colleges and universities didn't have and didn't use email facilities till the onset of the 21st century.  Smart boards made appearance towards the end of 20th century. 
But the impacts were still marginal. Chalk and talk was  still dominant.
Software was yet to make any impact in teaching. No institution had a good database system, even though we were teaching database courses for about 20 years. Open software was not used, even though the concept was there and open office made an appearance. Both word and powerpoint made their appearance near 1995. But even conferences didn't have facilities for ppt presentations. But by 2000,  it became the standard. 
But there was a silver cloud visible.
Internet was slowly reaching the country. But only urban institutions had a feasibility of internet connection. Even we at IISc struggled with poor bandwidth . BSNL was slowly waking up. But the web revolution started. Search engines appeared. But some ingenious attempts were tried out. One of our major projects was the Mahithi sindhu program. I was the prime architect involved with this program and subsequent IT programs for schools for the next 15 years.It started in 2000. Let me talk about it in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
30/09/24, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 493
“The Tipping Point is the biography of an idea, and the idea is very simple. It is that the best way to understand the emergence of fashion trends, the ebb and flow of crime waves, or, for that matter, the transformation of unknown books into bestsellers, or the rise of teenage smoking, or the phenomena of word of mouth, or any number of the other mysterious changes that mark everyday life is to think of them as epidemics. Ideas and products and messages and behaviors spread just like viruses do.”
Malcolm  Gladwell.     Tipping point

Let us look at the period 2000 to 2020. 
This is the growth period. Actually it started by the mid nineties itself .  PCs were available in most institutions including schools. Powerpoint presentations were accepted by most teachers. It took knowledge transfer to a next level. People started to use PCs a lot - to learn programming, to type a paper , to do calculations and to prepare an illustrative presentation deck. I saw some company accountants doing most of their calculations and preparing balance sheets using spreadsheets. Engineers also did their  calculations  on  that. Architects used PCs for drawing views of their building. In a conference, i heard a person say ,” we can see a building without laying even a single brick.” Many educational contents came as a software package. The keys here were
1.user interface was considered essential . The arrogance of the knowall systems analysts were thrownout. Systems analysts lost their importance and jobs.
2. Mainframe died to a large extent. Servers dominated everywhere. 
3. Software became simple and a product for sales. Good examples were accounting software, kannada wordprocessor, and many educational software. 
It was a  good time to develop software. Many training institutions used software for teaching. Engineering colleges started using Autocad, Matlab , and many tutors . Labs were built on software. 
But what changed the scenario was the availability of search engines and web services. Most  Information was available on the web. Many faculty in the west put their ppts on the web ,so our teachers accessed them . 
The Web provided great advantages for education.  Some faculty used the web , internet and many used search engines. It had a great impact on teaching. 
Students were more aware of the developments happening everywhere in the world and so they put their teachers on the mat. This made some teachers use Google, quora  etc. 
Then came some pure teaching sites like khan academy and they taught many students. Online teaching started picking up with coursera and edX in the west and Nptel in india. While Nptel started with faculties of IITs,  it now has contributions from many faculty members - more than 4000 courses are available . This led to a quantum leap in students learning hard topics. 
Youtube also helped students to attend lectures by experts and even demos of experiments. The understanding level went up. A simple evidence was reflected in the outcome of exams. More than 50% of students failed in their first year engineering examinations.  This came down considerably now. The tipping point is the use of tools. 
By 2000 , CDROM replaced floppy disks as mobile data carriers. Small companies  were burning lessons in these devices and they sold them to schools. Many companies sprung up across the country to develop specific contents and sell them to schools. This concept of schools and colleges building up such CDs became  popular during the 2000 to 2010. During this period hard disk capacity went up . So files were conveniently stored in the hard disk. PCs became very powerful. So even teachers started using PCs. Laptops appeared on the scene. Some teachers took a laptop and projected it on the wall in the classroom. So teaching has improved. Some classrooms were fitted with projectors. 
All these tools have improved our learning and teaching activities. 
But broadband was still a distance away. Dialup systems were the only one available. Colleges started setting up a campus wide network. Most put up an optic fibre backbone and connected most labs and took a reasonable but still with only a low bandwidth - 64 or 128 kb connection . This situation improved over the years, particularly after optical fibre became available in most parts of the country, and private players jumped into the fray breaking the monopoly of BSNL. 
It is this good bandwidth networks becoming available in most cities and many switches and routers being available in the country, changed the scene. Access to the internet was much better at higher speeds. People got broadband connection in their houses. Web usage increased. 
This is also the period when offices in most organizations were automated. Typewriters became obsolete. This is also the period when most industries moved to ERP , CRM,MRP and other software to improve their efficiency and quality.  It is also the period when banks moved to a centralised database and automated transactions through core banking software and networking . Data centres came up in good numbers across the country. Governments moved to computerised file management. NIC played a big role in governmental work. All these above mentioned developments started from 1995 onwards and picked pace after 2000. 
We saw the onset of online examinations, online remote meetings and lectures .
This period saw lots of technological changes. Software became mature. Data centres anywhere in the world was accepted. Services got enlarged with cloud. SOA became a good tool to integrate many software packages. Many services like SAAS, PAS , etc became available. 
I felt that teachers were ahead in this era of digital transformation compared to banks and other organizations.  
Let us look at Mahithisindhu program next.
Greetings
Dks
01/10/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 494
In the late 1960s, a Harvard psychology professor took LSD, resigned his appointment (with some encouragement from the administration), went to India, met a guru, and returned to write a popular book called Be Here Now.
Now, why would anyone go all the way to India and spend his time, money, and brain cells just to learn how not to think about the future? Because, as anyone who has ever tried to learn meditation knows, not thinking about the future is much more challenging than being a psychology professor. Not to think about the future requires that we convince our frontal lobe not to do what it was designed to do, and like a heart that is told not to beat, it naturally resists this suggestion. Unlike N.N., most of us do not struggle to think about the future because mental simulations of the future arrive in our consciousness regularly and unbidden, occupying every corner of our mental lives.
Daniel Gilbert.  Stumbling on happiness 

While most engineering colleges established computer science programs and hence provided good facilities for learning programming and using the web, this was  followed by improving computer facilities in the regular colleges also. Let me talk about my involvement in this. 
By the early nineties , many colleges wanted to set up computer centres.  Computer science became a major subject in PUC itself.  I was involved with computers in two colleges. One was MES college , another was MLA college. MLA college started their computer courses very early by mid or late eighties itself. Sudha murthy was teaching there after returning to bangalore. I advised MES college to set up a computer lab, buy computers and even furniture. 
Later I was a member of a committee set up by the state government for sanctioning BCA courses. Because of our approvals,  most arts and sciences colleges started the BCA program. These really helped in reaching most districts . These covered college education. But what about at school level?
Many schools, mostly private schools in big cities and some in District headquarters wanted to start  computer classes. This gave birth to a new industry - computer facilitators. Almost every big city had  many such facilitators who would conduct classes and practicals in many schools at a fee per student. This happened in the mid eighties itself. I had helped the Gujarati high school in bangalore in selecting computers and fixing  a facilitator. It ran successfully. Some schools had an in-house teacher for computers and a good computer lab. I am familiar with national public school at Rajajinagar one of the early starters in computer education for students. It employed a teacher and had a very good computer lab. 
Another school I was involved with was the Purna prajna school at palace orchards . I was involved with this school for more than a decade. I selected the computer faculty for many years and helped in upgrading the computers. The computer culture was quite deep. Computers were used for learning many subjects. Many content developers came up in the country. 
But these are mostly private schools. There were no computers in government schools. 
So when SM Krishna became the chief minister of Karnataka in 1999, he announced the mahithisindhu program. The idea was to introduce computers in 1000 government high schools across karnataka and introduce computer based teaching of English,  sciences , mathematics and social sciences. It was the first major massive program initiated by any government.  I was involved in this fully. Mr Vijaya Bhaskar was the commissioner of education then. We planned a holistic approach. 
First we identified the bottlenecks.
No room available in schools for a computer lab.
Power supply is erratic. 
No telephone or dialup connections were available in most schools. 
We first decided to get the schools to build a lab and also get power connection. 
Then we decided the components of the program as
A computer centre with upto20 PCs and a server with LAN connections 
Office software and an interpreter or compilers
Prepare  computer text books for classes 8 to 10 based on a syllabus framed by us. 
Prepare a full schedule of lab work. 
Preparation of contents for the mathematics,  English,  sciences and social studies courses from 8th to 10th stds.
Running the centre professionally by a computer science graduate - either BE or MCA. He or she should teach the courses.
Most teaching should be  hands-on . 
Training for regular  teachers. 
Let me discuss the next step in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
02/10/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 495
“I felt a new kind of calmness—one of a profundity never experienced before. I had just found that “I”, that scanning device—that point—that essence—that place beyond. A place where “I” existed independent of social and physical identity. That which was I was beyond Life and Death. And something else—that “I” Knew—it really Knew. It was wise, rather than just knowledgeable. It was a voice inside that spoke truth. I recognized it, was one with it, and felt as if my entire life of looking to the outside world for reassurance—David Reisman’s other-directed being, was over. Now I need only look within to that place where I Knew.”
Robert Alpert  / Ram Dass     Be here now 

Once we decided on the components required for a successful computer based learning , our next step was on “ how do we implement this massive scheme?”
There were three options. 
In-house activity - this can't be undertaken by the KGCC .
Partial outsourcing - computers supplied by companies and installed in schools and operationalised. Running the computer centre and teaching is left to the schools. This mode failed. 
Divide the total scope into three parts. Infrastructure development - to be done by the school . Computer supply , installation, text book preparation, internet connection, separate computer teacher appointment , running the classes , exams, teachers training - all these to be outsourced to a capable agency. The third was production of contents for subjects - given as a separate contract.
We followed  the third strategy. We prepared a detailed rfp- request for proposals along with cost structure-  to implement the scheme. We made the eligibility strict and floated the tender to prospective vendors. We conducted a clarification meeting for vendors before they prepared and submitted their response.   The pre bid meeting of intended bidders was chaotic. All education department seniors were missing. I had to handle it alone. Only Mr Satyamurthy from DSERT was with me. His support throughout the execution of this project was great. He just listened to my instructions  and executed  them sincerely. He stayed with me during the entire five years of execution and even beyond. Many small companies wanted to bid for the project. It was a great opportunity for them. Even some ministers floated companies to participate in the tender. Lots of  Fortunately, the education minister , Mr Viswanath was very helpful. He told me to handle it. 
We gave the order to three major companies. I set up an inspection team consisting of faculty members from about 15 engineering colleges to visit all schools every quarter and submit a report. I will see these reports and clear payments . This worked well. 
We also got the contents developed in CDs and distributed to schools. That wasn't an easy task. The developer just copied text book into a CD , no visualisation. I had to fight with them. To give an example, the prepositions - in, on, below, above,  top, bottom were not properly illustrated. I told them “ show a table. Take books and show how these propositions work. “ The developers were useless. The promoter of the company complained to the chief minister, SM Krishna ,” we can satisfy anyone in the world but not Prof DKS” i wasn't present. Both the two secretaries - IT and school education- told me this incident later. They said  that the CM just smiled. I said that was a credit for me. It took me several months of work to get the CDs approved. My lab assistant Gangaraju helped me in setting up facilities for the demo of these CDs.
The impacts were striking. 
Pass percentage in SSLC increased from 50% to 56% in the first year, then to 62% in the second year and to 70% in the third year. Attendance improved to 100%. Enrollment went up. 
That shows the impact of using CDs providing detailed explanations to many topics in the syllabus. 
Seeing our schools computerisation project, both Tamilnadu and kerala followed it with different models. By 2010 ,a large number - several thousands - used computers for teaching. More programs were launched by the government to cover most high schools. 

But we need to look at a new tool , a very controversial one - gen AI. Let us look at it next. 
Greetings
Dks
03/10/24, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 496
“When AI is used in isolation, the impact of major failures could be large but contained. However, as AI is being used more and more in connected systems such as in the stock market for automated trading, unexpected catastrophic failures could lead to the widespread failure of entire systems. We don’t need to go very far back in history to recall how credit default swaps caused the financial crisis of 2008 and the valuation of Russia’s ruble led to the 1998 crash of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) – a $126 billion hedge fund – that subsequently required a bailout from the US Fed. Will the use of more AI in financial markets lead to similar catastrophic failures in the future?”
Susanne chishti.     AI book

Let me look at some comments.
Mr PV Joshi , Indian bank  has this comment on my last post:
“DKS , you are excellent taskmaster. I have first hand experience. Your contributions are guidance for many ,
Regards”
My response
While I have done many major projects like the power systems for Delhi, BCCL, IISc, and sysgel for TCS before the mahithisindhu program and many afterwards , and a large number of minor projects like computerization in the state government of karnataka for more than 20 years, world bank schemes, computerization in many organizations and colleges- about 50 in number-, networking for many institutions , this project gave me immense satisfaction. 
It was unique in many ways. 
It reached the entire state, touched the poor rural children.
It was successful in achieving many goals. Internet happened only in cities, not in villages. That was upsetting to us. 
It was a very challenging job. I had problems with politicians, vendors, school managements, DSERT director and government officials . It was tough to handle all these. I learnt many tricks - vendor capability assessment ,  corrections based on learning like installing DG sets as power interruptions prolonged beyond 6 hours and batteries died, crowd handling, importance of participation by school managements HMs, teachers ,etc. I realised that technology needs  less than 5% of our attention.  But I got great support from the commissioners of education starting with Mr Vijayabhaskar, secretaries of the education department, senior officers of DSERT particularly Mr Satyamurthy, Mr Vivek Kulkarni,secretary IT, Mr Ramana Reddy ,Director, KGCCanminister Mr Viswanath, minister for education, Mr Jairam Ramesh and the CM, Mr SM Krishna. Their approvals and confidence in me took the project to success. There was no interference from officers. We kept out many officers from this work. I learnt a great lesson here - less number of people, more work, less nuisance,  less corruption and success of the project. I worked with only one person Mr Satyamurthy,  a very dedicated person and very devoted one, i haven't seen many like him. 
There was no corruption . I was surprised and worked with clean officers. This should open the eyes of most of us who criticise the government for corruption. There are many islands of honest, dedicated, sincere, poor officers in the government. I have experienced the support of many such sincere and pious officers.
This project was unique. It wasn't simply supplying computers to schools which was done before. It was the first massive project encompassing 1000 high schools in the state initially. Secondly it was holistic.
Most importantly I got a lot of freedom to work on this project in addition to cooperation. I could architect it completely and holistically. Vijayabhaskar’s support and advice was useful. My independence was unbelievable.  It was very enjoyable to work on this project. I worked for more than 6 years on this project. I don't run away from challenges. 
Also I could plan periodic  inspections. It was another cog in the wheel for the success of this project. This is another unique feature. I could network with about. 15 engineering colleges, not an easy task to develop a collaborative work. I worked with more than 200 faculty members . They followed my instructions, were excited to be part of this experiment. My reach with colleges helped me in this. Many faculty members were surprised at the planning and acquisition of latest computers for these rural schools. They said they don't have such machines in their colleges. 
I had many interventions by activists. There were open source enthusiasts who objected to our buying and using microsoft office. I was able to convince the committees that MS office is a good choice. I told the protesters that i organised a conference on IPR and open source quite early. I am a supporter of open office. But they should ask all government offices to move to open office. Don't start bottomup. It won't help. I hoped many of the students trained under this program will get jobs because of their office knowledge.  A second objection came from kannada ganaka parishad, inaugurated by me. I decided early that we will retain most English terms for technical aspects in the book. We don't have differentiated kannada equivalents for many terms like computer/ calculator/ counter, memory storage etc. Memory was translated as smarana meaning remember. Storage was translated as ugrana - store room in the kitchen. While the text books were in kannada, technical terms like cpu etc were retained so that the students are on par with others in this respect. 
 So I was happy to have architected and implemented this project. It gave me immense satisfaction. My senior colleague from our EE department,  Prof MAL Thathachar expressed surprises in an open talk and admired my capability to work with politicians. 
I will look at your second comment tomorrow.  
Greetings
Dks
03/10/24, 5:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Sharan navarathri is starting today with ten days of social and religious activities. It is celebrated throughout the country. The importance here is for Shakti and energy to remove evils. We need great mind power to remove the evils happening now in the world. Let us pray that good prevails in the minds of all and evils go away. Let there be happiness every where. Let us thank our ancestors for devising a series of festivals for social and harmonious living . 
Greetings
Dks
03/10/24, 4:44 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Best wishes for the Navaratri festival!
04/10/24, 5:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 497
the futures that our brains insist on simulating are not all wine, kisses, and tasty bivalves. They are often mundane, irksome, stupid, unpleasant, or downright frightening, and people who seek treatment for their inability to stop thinking about the future are usually worrying about it rather than reveling in it. Just as a loose tooth seems to beg for wiggling, we all seem perversely compelled to imagine disasters and tragedies from time to time. On the way to the airport we imagine a future scenario in which the plane takes off without us and we miss the important meeting with the client. On the way to the dinner party we imagine a future scenario in which everyone hands the hostess a bottle of wine while we greet her empty-handed and embarrassed. 
Daniel Gilbert.   Stumbling on  happiness 

Mr Joshi's  second comment of my being a taskmaster is also an important one. It reveals a characteristic of me that has  put me into trouble many times. Actually it worries me. But once I am committed to a task , I want to get it completed successfully. I won't say that I found success in all projects I was involved with. But I found success in a project where I was given control and my views were accepted and  there was at least  one sincere person in charge.    I felt that if I don't put myself into it, a project can become  a rudderless ship. So I was a bit strong in my opinions. But I had an open mind but with a goal in focus.  I never felt comfortable but stuck to my guns unless convinced by others. There are not many like you who understood my intentions and accepted my behavior. I don't like smart alecs and illiterates in influential positions. I have clashed with many.  My popularity has been low because of that strong quality . But  I needed it to succeed in a task . I am happy to have worked with many - several hundreds - like you in colleges, government, industries and banks. I am very happy and satisfied with my interactions with all these people in very senior positions. Most became lifelong friends. 
My interactions with you were memorable.  I cherish them.
Actually , I got  great support and respect from many EDs and GMs of SBI,  Canara bank,  Indian bank, Corporation bank, PNB, Syndicate bank , Vijaya bank and Equitas. I did a technology audit for SBI. Later I advised Canara bank on its first branch computerization project  for its parliament street branch. I  am in touch with many officers who worked with me in the banks, but lost touch with many. I can't forget the experiences I got while working for more than 20 years with banks. The core banking transformation was not easy and the problems were different for each bank. I actually went on a discovery trip here. 
My work with banks was my fourth dimension - the other three being academics, government and industries. I learnt a lot during my association with banks. 
Thanks.
Mr Aravind ,TCS remembers :
“Nostalgic Sir. Thanks for sharing your days of OHP, floppy disks and dial up  BSNL connections, where we used to hear the ringing tone, when some data used to be coming in, which was mostly emails”
Thanks. 
Greetings 
Dks
05/10/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 498
Today, insurance premiums and mortgage rates may already be biased for people of certain ethnic origins; however, with the use of deep learning to discover connections between multiple sources of data, we may end up faced with quotes and premiums that depend on factors that we would typically consider unfair and unjust from an ethical perspective.
The question is, will AI cause our moral compass to shift course?
Susanne chishti.     AI book

Mr Aravind also has another comment.  
“Good data points which can be easily related to the process followed”
My response 
Thanks. 
I started with a flexible process in mind and also had an idea on the various  steps to be done. My process was not completely decided in the beginning. But a framework was ready. 
I tried to look for an appropriate process for each transformation. Recall the process followed by me for KSEEB in which you were involved. I followed a different route and it succeeded. But when I followed another route for the same activity in a university - no SRS was prepared like in the school board case, it failed. I got great support from the vice chancellor, registrar, controller of exams and finance officer , and got a person appointed for support at the university end. But it failed because it didn't have one person in charge of the project from the university end . It was an orphaned baby being pulled in many directions . Also the vendor cheated us. 
All organizations have different culture . So your process should be context sensitive to each organization's culture, strengths , weaknesses and needs. It is a social and cultural problem solving, not logical or systemic or even procedural. I had difficulties to align the important staff to the objectives of transformation.  There were officers in banks even at very senior level who were comfortable with their then existing state and didn't want changes. So they opposed core banking. The next alignment is between internal people of the organization and vendor. This is very tough. If one is rigid - I saw one big IT services company telling banks “ take it or leave it. This is what we can give “. At the other extreme , i saw TCS bending to every request of the customer. This non alignment leads to misunderstanding, unsatisfactory solutions , and mistrust. 

I consider  my involvements with many projects - in IISc, government of Karnataka,  Mahithi sindhu,  KSEEB, KSCST,  APMC, Gadag, TCS, many  banks, Central silk board, Jindal Steels, Jayadeva institute of Cardiology, Vidhana soudha/ PWD, Mysore paper, KSRTC ,  land army corporation,  DST, government of India for NRDMS, Department of Space for COWWA, Integra micro systems  for fintech,  TEQIP a world bank scheme,JNCASR, ISEC,  DG shipping,  IDRBT, karle constructions, many other organizations,  many universities and colleges - very useful, very satisfying . These associations  gave me another focus and purpose in life. All these spanned for more than 40 years. I came in contact with hundreds of senior officers, saw different work culture, different beliefs, different kinds of experiences - a vast canvas of the country. I worked for more than 20 years post retirement from IISc.  I don't think many got this opportunity. I cherish the friendship of many. Most importantly, I was taken aback by the respect and trust bestowed by all these people  in me- that is remarkable. They sought clarifications,  but not questioned my actions. Overall I felt that most understood me , my commitment, my deep work culture and my expertise.  It was a great meaningful time in a major part of my life. I thank everyone for this happiness.
More from Joshi
“Hello DKs , 
Your above writing reminded me , our association at Bank . You understood banks strategy if technology implementation and discussed ground level needs . Your approach was to fulfil needs of banking customers, and always interacted with working staff , and IT departments. 
You were really a bridge between executives and business and IT department. Many advisers interact only with top executives. You interacted with all vertical and horizontal levels.  Rarest of the Rare quality. 
As you experienced, with honest and committed team , nobody dares to bring pressure or corrupt practises. 
I learnt lot from you . 
Thanks n regards.”
Humbled by your comments. Joshi. 
Greetings 
Dks
06/10/24, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 499
“our instincts—our natural tendencies to think or react in certain ways when faced 
with a decision—aren’t as trustworthy as we might believe. We’re subject to inherent biases, false confidence, irrational risk aversion, and any number of decision-making pitfalls. Katherine Milkman of the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School, who has researched and written extensively on decision-making, says: “The science simply doesn’t support the value of following your gut1—in fact, it supports exactly the opposite approach to decision-making.” The psychologist and decision-making expert Daniel Levitin concurs: If you make decisions based on instinct, he says, “your gut is going to be wrong more than it is right.”
Warren Berger  book of beautiful questions

Let us move to more comments.
Mr Joshi , Indian bank is concerned about genAI.
“Sir , I was reading news today , came across , a headline '  The integration of generative AI is no longer an option for businesses but a necessity. Gen AI can help companies accelerate high-quality content production, gain new insights, scale personalized customer outreach, and enhance overall communication quality. The introduction of gen AI isn’t just a technological upgrade. It’s a fundamental shift in how employees communicate and how businesses operate. It’s the new language of business. '    Is our present education system in general capable of handling new challenges .  Highly rated institutions  , should create a system to percolate to all district level universities .     Regards”

Mr Nagaraja comments:
“Good morning sir. Your posts are really very interesting & makes us to recall the developments that took place in the last several decades. What about Meta AI  which is a software product developed in 2014 by Facebook in their FAIR lab, which is available as a contact in WhatsApp? May I request you to know your views regarding it's useful in improving quality of education system?
Thanks with regards. HSN”
My response 
These concerns are genuine. I have read more than 10 books including one by the famous Yuval Harari titled “ Nexus” . Many have raised ethical considerations. Many have raised their voices to the disasterous consequences due to the misdeeds of AI. The possibility of such misdeeds were well known. There is a book titled “ Life3.0. Being human in the age of AI” by Prof. Max Tegmark written in 2017 or earlier. It vividly describes transformations that will happen to us in the years to come. In the book “singularities are nearer”  by Kurzweil published in 2024 , the author lists many problems that AI will pose , but says these can be solved. Sam Altman, the inventor of open AI, has also alerted the authorities about many issues due to AI. So there is a lot of alertness amongst even AI researchers. 
Let me put my thoughts here.
Alister McLean wrote in the 1970s a fiction called fear is the key. I was a great fan. I realised we are destroyed by fear at that point in time. Then I read a beautiful one page article in Readers Digest in the eighties that was titled as “when I wanted to borrow a screw driver to repair my car when it stopped in the road”. The summary was that the person saw a house nearby and walked towards it. He started to worry if he didn't get support. He created arguments in his mind and developed anger. When he reached the house, he started shouting at the owner. I see these reactions of fear , worry and anger today against AI. Quite a lot of these reactions are genuine and need to be acted upon to prevent disasters. 
We know that experience based decisions can go wrong. We all have experiences of wrong and unexpected decisions. Past can guide us to some extent only. The earlier machine learning used experiential data to predict on a new situation. Its dependability was good on similar happenings. When a new unexpected and unknown event occurs, ML answer may be wrong. 
The current genAI uses language models also along with neural networks and Bayesian learning. It is good for some activities and can provide good answers. Examples are writing a fiction or poetry, talking, answering questions etc. It is improving and may lead to the level of good and intelligent  assistants and multilingual experts. 
Today we are using AI in a standalone mode. So control is easy. You can discard the results. But when AI is integrated with a system or process and used for online operations like using AI to control a nuclear power plant , it becomes  dangerous. So we need a strong regulatory authority to control such kinds of operations. Is that kind of strong regulation  possible in a soft  state like india?I doubt it.
Let us see  more of AI, particularly our preparedness in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
07/10/24, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 450
there is a Tipping Point for the introduction of any new technology. Sharp introduced the first low priced fax machine in 1984, and sold about 80,000 of those machines in the United States in that first year. For the next three years, businesses slowly and steadily bought more and more faxes, until, in 1987, enough people had faxes that it made sense for everyone to get a fax. Nineteen eighty seven was the fax machine Tipping Point. A million machines were sold that year, and by 1989 two million new machines had gone into operation. Cellular phones have followed the same trajectory. Through the 1990s, they got smaller and cheaper, and service got better until 1998, when the technology hit a Tipping Point and suddenly everyone had a cell phone.
 Malcolm  Gladwell                  Tipping point.  
     
Let me continue on AI , its impacts and our preparedness.  
The effects of AI was understood by the founders of the new discipline called AI in 1956 in a workshop organized In Dartmouth by McCarthy.  It had also Minsky, Shannon , Rochester and others. McCarthy coined the name AI. They cautioned on the need for extensive research particularly about security. When I started teaching in 1967, I wasn't familiar with the word AI. But I was looking at the thinking aspects and gave my first talk on “ are computers thinking machines?” In 1967. So the intelligence capacity was perceived then itself. 
I think that  AI is not dealing with intelligence,  but aping humans in understanding natural languages, logical approaches,data analysis, questioning, and some levels of conscious decision making. Aitareya Upanishad talks of 16 forms of intelligence. When will our research on AI reach any of those levels, I don't know. But one thing is clear. Today's AI  is only an augmentation to our intelligence, a big tool. We need to build a super AI to control AI and keep that under  human guidance. We need to introduce AI into online systems slowly after testing thoroughly . We need to add trust into AI programs. We need to move into a new area urgently - that of impact analysis of AI results. That is urgent. 
Regarding the impacts of AI, initially it will replace most white collar jobs . There will be a great deal of unemployment. We need to find a way of feeding millions of unemployed people and their families. It will create a highly unequal society. AI developers will rule over AI users and AI illiterates. If it falls in evil hands , it will lead to massive destruction.
As regards the question of readiness of our educational systems, my conclusion is our institutions  are not aware of even AIs  impacts and implications. All big IT companies like TCS, Infosys, Wipro etc were preparing to use AI for the past 20 years. TCS developed Igneo long back - in  2005 itself. So they are using AI and are getting to use genAI.  Our engineering colleges have started an AI undergraduate program. But they didn't realise that AI is not a computer science area. We need to start applications courses in banking, fintech, commerce, health and medicine, agriculture, security, utilities etc in agriculture universities. Medical colleges, commerce institutions, arts colleges, language institutions, Sanskrit colleges  and even schools.
Today's  Hindustan times has this report.
“Thousands of IndiGo passengers were made to wait for hours for baggage drop-ins and check-ins after the airline experienced a temporary "system outage" leading to long queues at various airports across the country. Departures of domestic flights were also delayed in various cities causing massive chaos at the airports.”
We are yet to get adjusted to digital technology and communications. So the persistent question of Luddites is “ How will we handle both digital and AI, poor and rich, literate and illiterate , urban and rural divides?” We need to find out reasons for ese technology failures. We will be the only country going through the four waves of developments in parallel - agriculture,  industries, information and digital and AI. 

So in summary, we have to understand the role and impact of AI, prepare plans in advance to minimise the bad impacts, build a new army and security systems , build hundreds of applications. AI needs a large volume of data . We can't use public cooked up data. So we should activate data generation activities in many institutions. ISEC is creating a good data bank. We need to build language models based on Paninian grammar and Tholkappiam / Nannool. Lots need to be done to safeguard our people and security.
Greetings
Dks
07/10/24, 6:40 am - Sanjay Chitnis: https://notebooklm.google.com/notebook/a8ef597e-fec6-4ebf-b7ae-91924a4ab7ba?_gl=1*1rq6xju*_ga*MjAwMDIxOTg5Ni4xNzI1NzkzOTUy*_ga_W0LDH41ZCB*MTcyODI2MjgzOS41LjEuMTcyODI2MzI2MS42MC4wLjA.&authuser=2
07/10/24, 6:43 am - Sanjay Chitnis: I did not know anything about Tamil grammar. So to experiment with the use of AI to understand Nannul, I got the pdf version of translation of Nannul, wikipedia page and a textbook on Tamil literature. Then I uploaded on Google notebooklm which created the whole set of documents in 5 min - overview, index, FAQ etc. I have shared the notebook above.
07/10/24, 6:43 am - Sanjay Chitnis: It also created an 8 min postcast using 2 synthesized voices.
07/10/24, 6:44 am - Sanjay Chitnis: <Media omitted>
07/10/24, 7:49 am - Sanjay Chitnis: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1bpeaxwsVvd3iLsPW1n45zmkxIBPPxjaj/view?usp=drivesdk
07/10/24, 7:49 am - Sanjay Chitnis: In case the first one does not open
07/10/24, 8:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Thanks. It is derived from Tholkappiam and that is derived from the original agasthyam developed by agasthiar.  Agaisthiam is extinct now.
07/10/24, 8:13 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Yes Sir. If you have not yet tried notebooklm.google yet, I request to try that. Amazing innovation.
07/10/24, 8:13 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Nothing to install.  Needs only the Google ID
07/10/24, 9:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Done
08/10/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 501
“new way to think and to live 
From self-driving cars to chatbots too 
AI is changing what we do 
Making our lives more efficient and quick 
AI is the future, there's no doubt about it 
But some fear the rise of AI 
Will it take our jobs away?
Or will it make our lives more free? 
Only time will tell 
The true extent of AI's might 
But for now, we can only marvel 
At this technological sight.”
Schouten.     Rising AI

Sorry I made a mistake in numbering my previous post as 450 instead of 500. I thank my cousin D R Krishnan for pointing this mistake to me. 
Mr Joshi has one more query.
“AI is new demon or Angel ? And next question, after AI what next technology upgradation?”
My response:
AI is not a demon . It definitely helps us, it will improve our agricultural production, our diagnosis and treatment, surgery, our water, power, gas utilities, transport. It will help in reducing carbon emissions, cleaning water. reducing consumption of natural resources, preserving forests and building new forests, securing houses , etc. It can monitor and control nuclear power plants, alert us on disasters , provide solutions by analysing landslides in Himalayas and western ghats better.  It will help in reducing plastics or producing biodegradable plastics. It will help in monitoring urban garbage problem. It can bring in better governance , reduce corruption and even initiate political reforms and change a  democracy.
AI can increase cognition by students, enhance learning and knowledge. It will bring the entire world's knowledge to a student's computer and help him or her to solve new problems. The need for a teacher will be minimal. A student will know more than a teacher. 
 But it can destroy buildings, provide weapons for AI super powers with capability to destroy the world, destroy stored food grains , put many millions in survival problems, it will discriminate against people with its builtin biases and can destroy a country's economy. It can initiate war.
 Actually , current AI is a culmination of development of many technologies like big data, terahertz GPUs, IOT, 5G, analytics, terahertz frequency usages, language models, human psychology , etc and their integrated applications to solve our problems.  If data weren't available and very high speed and GPUs weren't available, then AI today will fail. 
Analysts expect total capital spending by Microsoft to represent 28% of Microsoft’s revenue this fiscal year and 27% in the next fiscal year, and revenue from AI not known . So AI is not surging. It is moving slowly. 
Lots of R and D activities  are waiting for us to move forward and control AI and direct it towards goodness. Future looks bleak for many and good for many. 
People like Sridhar Vembu will create alternate systems. Some people will create a computerless society in some small villages going back on these developments , and living in a natural and spiritual world. Won't that be good? 
Our vedas say that we have both daivatva and asura properties in all of us. They are not two independent separate categories of beings . So the question is - what will dominate in a society ? - daivatva or asura guna. Optimists will say daivatva - goodness- will prevail over evil. But transition is going to be very painful.
AI itself will evolve in the next 25 years to improve its consciousness. But I expect massive developments in applying AI in almost all areas , much bigger than the digital era, but with greater intensity and faster pace. More jobs there development and deployment both will go hand in hand in parallel. Hope we use the opportunity wisely. 
Dr. Sanjay Chitnis has already downloaded information about nannool. Both paninian grammar and Tholkappiam are more semantics embedded in the grammar, not syntax alone like English, not ambiguous like English. 
Bio nano tech will lead to further progress - natural bio protein based systems not manufactured but grown organically like food today. That is my mirror to the future - back to organic living. Is it a dream?
Thanks for all comments on AI, a very interesting and concerned topic 
Greetings
Dks
09/10/24, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 502
“Americans gladly pay millions—perhaps even billions—of dollars every year to psychics, investment advisors, spiritual leaders, weather forecasters, and other assorted hucksters who claim they can predict the future. Those of us who subsidize these fortune-telling industries do not want to know what is likely to happen just for the joy of anticipating it. We want to know what is likely to happen so that we can do something about it. If interest rates are going to skyrocket next month, then we want to shift our money out of bonds right now. If it is going to rain this afternoon, then we want to grab an umbrella this morning. Knowledge is power, and the most important reason why our brains insist on simulating the future even when we’d rather be here now, enjoying a goldfish moment, is that our brains want to control the experiences we are about to have.”
 Gilbert                  Stumbling happiness 

My uncle has made some comments :
The  sweeping   statement  that  '  we  can  satisfy  anyone   in   the   world   but  not Prof,  DKS '  by  a  promoter    requires  a  clause  I,e,   '  if  not  up  to  his   (   DKS   )    specifications   and   standards,'   He   was  not  for   any  concessions  or  compromise,   Otherwise,  how  could   he  enjoy   the   association  of
    Governments,  banks,  institutions,   professionals,  Industrialists, research   workers,  teachers   students   etc  Every body  liked  his counsel ,  So ,  the   queue   of   people   to  get  his   academic,  scientific,   teaching  and   technical   help,  grew  with   leaps  and  bounds, 

I  am   happy   Sri   SM  Krishna   gave  his  smile   as   a  gift,

Ramakrishnan   Uncle    4 -- !0  - 24
My response:
 Thanks. I did nothing out of the way. I told them what is wanted but the developers were dumb , didn't understand my instructions and so they delayed the content development. The delay was inordinate, not acceptable. That is why the secretaries informed the CM. And the company proprietor complained about me. I was glad that the CM responded well. Mr S M Krishna is a very mature and learned  politician . 

My cousin D R Krishnan has congratulated me. 
“[08/10, 4:46 pm] D R Krishnan: Congratulations for completing another 100 posts taking the total to 500
Nowadays the postings are highly educative and I have to read with care
You have done a wonderful job
[08/10, 4:48 pm] D R Krishnan: Memory power is remarkable”
My response:
Thanks a lot. You have been encouraging me from the beginning.  I am happy you read my posts . I found Sundaram remembering my posts. Remarkable.  Rajam also reads and sends me voice messages regularly. Thanks to all of you. 
Greetings
Dks
10/10/24, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 503
If people knew how hard I worked to get my 
mastery, it wouldn’t seem so wonderful at all.
—Michelangelo
We do not need magic to transform our world. We carry all the power we need inside ourselves already. 
We have the power to imagine better.
—J. K. Rowling


Prof P Raja has sent some comments.

“Certainly sir, your spectrum of in depth wisdom with multiple fields and your conviction have yielded results in many fronts. 
How do you get the instinct in respect of context and culture of our people? what is your understanding of others? it needs lot of experience and expertise to understand the nuances I hope. Your comments sir”

My response
Your question looks at a human being building many characteristics as he or she is growing. 
A child starts as a simple entity without any hatred, any opinions, any beliefs, any value judgments . Even, its observations were limited and started developing in the initial years. All children are born with one important trait - learning characteristics, the levels vary. But as a child starts growing,  it picks up many more characteristics. Several factors decide on the qualities of a person as he or she grows.

Many characteristics of a person are born. Examples are learning, observation, understanding, shyness, some emotions , attention, concentration 
Many inborn characteristics are modified by the family. Examples are understanding, cognition,  introvertedness , attention , observation, calmness etc 
Many characteristics are molded by the family. There are many examples here and we will see them in the course of this post. The most important ones are peace of mind, smiling, love and affection, language, attention to details, contemplation, piety, work culture, humility, frugality, or the opposites of these. This phase is crucial in the development of a child - to be good or bad, to be satisfied or dissatisfied ,  to be happy or sad, to be highly attentive or moderately attentive or not interested, to learn eagerly or be disinterested etc. This needs to be understood by parents . Lots of learning happens through observations and copying. Family atmosphere plays an important role in a child's behaviours. This period also builds several beliefs in a child. 
By the age of 8 to 10, a child acquires a number of habits, emotions, behaviours,  beliefs and characteristics. Let us call this overall picture as a humanistic characteristics. 
Later more characteristics are developed or changed by society , relatives, neighbours,  friends , school etc. 
Some characteristics of a person are developed through observation, learning and cognition. 
While most remain true to their childhood humanisms, some have an open mind and change their specific habits or behaviours.   

In my case, I was lucky to have lived in two large and major households and in several places - a village and towns . So I had guidance from many people in both  grandfathers’ houses. Another biggest advantage was mentoring by my elder uncle. I was always with him for about 12 years. He taught me values, good habits and behaviours . I learnt commitment , work culture , planning and meticulous execution from him. His integrity was unquestionable. He was respected by most people. I learnt empathy, responsibility, independence, self help and studiousness from him. He was close to being a sthithapjana - equanimity - contented, calm, and firm in judgment and wisdom . The village ambience was very useful to build a calm , serene and pious behavior in me . I maintained this composure in my life to a large extent. Piety goes beyond prayers and belief in Gods.  It extended to respect for elders in the family and outside, to listen to them calmly and don't speak against them. It also meant helping all. 
Most importantly, it built a strong value system in me- truth is important, don't hurt others, no violence,  don't use harsh words , be clean always etc. It built a very important characteristic in me. I was a shy person. There was a lot of poverty everywhere with scarcity of food grains. So I learnt empathy in the beginning itself. I feel sad even now , the sadness was inside.  It was a pre-independence period and also just after independence. Country was coming out of a big trauma and there was idealism everywhere. That rubbed on me.  
So my character was built during my childhood days. I was committed to a task and completed it with responsibility. My empathy made me treat everyone equally and listen to them. 
I am very  tough on the outside, impatient and angry. I relied on doing everything by myself as much as possible. But I got a lot of help from many friends throughout my life. 
Hottest give some answers to Raja’s  questions.
Greetings
Dks
11/10/24, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 504
“Employees in high-trust organizations are more productive, have more energy at work, collaborate better with their colleagues, and stay with their employers longer than people working at low-trust companies. They also suffer less chronic stress and are happier with their lives, and these factors fuel stronger performance.
 Leaders understand the stakes—at least in principle. In its 2016 global CEO survey, PwC reported that 55% of CEOs think that a lack of trust is a threat to their organization’s growth.”
HBR on trust 

Mr Aravind has sent a detailed explanation on Hinton:
“Geoff Hinton (along with John Hopfield) won the 2024 Nobel prize in Physics. While Hopfield is a professor (retired) in a Physics department, Hinton is a Computer Science prof. at U. Toronto. He also worked for Google part time, until he retired so that he could freely criticize LLMs and other future AI advances as being high risk.
The Nobel prize in Physics was given for their work on "artificial neural networks for machine learning."  These inventions  would perhaps able us to better understand some of the wonders of human brain that no longer will remain wonder for the next generation.
Natural and productive physical labor were replaced by nonproductive gym exercises where you spend additional external energy (powering the treadmills etc.) to burn your internal energy producing nothing external.
In  the not-so-distant future, human beings will cease to be considered a superior intelligent species and may be some AI entity will be controlling us! 
Either that or some crazy person/crazy group will be controlling these AI tools to control all the rest of us. That crazy person could be a legitimate corporate head , legitimate head of a nation, a dictator or a terrorist leader. Elon Musk , Donald Trump, Putin , Hamas are all the indications of our potential future who will have the key to AI powered society. In my opinion, latter has the higher probability. 
Or perhaps , the human society will elevate itself to a higher plane of consciousness and inoculate themselves against the above said danger, so says the optimist in me.

Any views Sir?
 My response 
As regards the first part of understanding the brain, we need to go from physical aspect of brain as envisaged by the westerners to our upanishadic views of mind - Aitareya upanishad talks of 16 forms of intelligence and varaha upanishad talks of 92 tattvas-forms - . As I have written before, we should focus on consciousness. There are a number of questions there unanswered like
What is consciousness? How does one understand it? Is consciousness generated  only in our brain? Can brain studies answer this? Or do we need to know about the mind?
How is consciousness related to intelligence? What is intelligence? 
What do we know about the mind - vignanamaya kosha - the fourth sheath? 
Do we have answers in ancient Indian vedantic thoughts?
Should we not focus on mind and consciousness instead of brain?
Is looking for brain activity an answer for intelligence or something else?
Will it be able to read signals emanating in our body, their codes and meanings?
What are the many levels of it?
How does one develop it?
Why did it take so  long for humans to increase their level of consciousness?
What are the methods or ways of increasing consciousness?
AI sidestepped all these questions. 


My basic objection to AI research is its perception of intelligence. ML is not intelligence nor even learning. It analyzes experience data along with statistics and language models . It is mechanical. Neural networks are non model based blind forms of prediction based on a large volume of data. 
Second part of your comment is very valid and very dangerous. It will lead to undesirable dictatorship, silent wars, destruction of properties and people etc. Instability andxfear will rule the world if not controlled. 
We need to build a super controller to control AI operations, need stricter regulations, and control on research. 
But first control data generation and control and access. We are losing privacy. It is leading to frauds, insecurity, threats , and miserable living. 
We need to address this from various angles. One dimensional, linear , binary thinking has to give way to multidimensional,  multi solutions thinking. 
Let me list the different stages of AI in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
11/10/24, 4:27 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy mahanavami,  Saraswati puja , Ayudha puja , Dussehra.  
Greetings.
Dks
12/10/24, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 505
“Share information broadly
 Only 40% of employees report that they are well informed about their company’s goals, strategies, and tactics. This uncertainty about the company’s direction leads to chronic stress, which inhibits the release of oxytocin and undermines teamwork. Openness is the antidote. Organizations that share their “flight plans” with employees reduce uncertainty about where they are headed and why. Ongoing communication is key: A 2015 study of 2.5 million manager-led teams in 195 countries found that workforce engagement improved when supervisors had some form of daily communication with direct reports.”
HBR on trust 

Let me get back to the year 1987. Mostly I had a reasonably settled but pretty busy academic life. I was also traveling frequently as usual. I became the coordinator of proficience,  running the evening courses for industry persons. I also taught in the proficience courses on operating systems and databases regularly.  I had stopped going to PSTI for lectures. But my visits to engineering colleges increased. I also continued with AICTE inspections. I was teaching at IIM Bangalore.  
During this period , I was requested to teach a course on distributed operating systems at REC , Trichy.  Mr Murthy was in charge of the computer centre. There was no computer science faculty. So I visited Trichy  a couple of times to teach this course. I also attended their board of studies meetings for a few years. I found the situation in REC very disheartening.  There was a stay on recruitment and so there were no regular faculty members to teach the CS programs. The principal  had no interest in academics. He was the most unimpressive person I had met. But the students were top class. Murthy tried his best to run the program. In a few years, he built an iconic computer centre called Octagon.  Then he left for his PhD program at IIT Delhi.  I lost touch with him afterwards . I visited REC several times for several years afterwards till 2010 . 
DRDO ,Ministry of Defense decided to strengthen their talent pool . So they ran a sponsored MSc program in computer science. I started teaching many aspects of computer science. Prof Chandrasekaran of the physics department was in charge of this program. The selected students were placed in many DRDO labs after successfully completing the course. I had very good interactions with Prof Chandrasekaran and the students. I took my family once to Madurai. My son liked the guest house. I liked the program. But it didn't achieve its objectives. Most were not placed properly. So they lost interest and left the job. The program was discontinued. But I still remember one important thing that happened. One student from a rural area with poor knowledge of English did some good work for her project . It was a publishable material. We helped her to write a paper and it was published in a good journal. 
I attended the academic council meeting of Thiagarajar college during this period. As I said earlier I had been involved with several activities at TCE - board of studies meetings, academic council meetings, lectures , faculty selections etc-. 
During this period 1988 89, Prof Nityanandan, principal, TCE decided to run a conference on optimisation. I was a member of the organizing committee and an invited speaker. There was no direct train to Madurai then. I used to go  by bus directly or to  take the night train to Trichy and then   to Madurai by bus. Dr Vidyasagar was the chief guest for the valedictory function of the conference. He talked about logic. Since the college arranged a car to drop him at Trichy , I returned with him in the car to Trichy and then to bangalore by train.  
That was also  the period when my uncle Sankaran, my father's younger brother retired from service and he undertook a trip to Bangalore and Udupi and Mookambika temples. When he returned to Bangalore from the trip to dakshina kannada , he wasn't well. He went back to Kolkata. He passed away after a few months. He had jaundice, not detected and treated. Since he didn't have any children, I had to go to kolkata to perform his 13 day ceremonies. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
12/10/24, 5:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy vijayadasami. 
Greetings
Dks
13/10/24, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 506
The learning theory specifies a clear division of labor between nature and nurture: the genes first set up vast spaces of a priori hypotheses—and the environment then selects the hypotheses which best match the external world. The set of hypotheses is
genetically specified; their selection is experience-dependent.
Dehaene.          How We learn?
I met Mr R Vasu and Kumar from NPC institute of productivity at Madras. I started visiting Madras for lectures on energy and computers to their trainees. I visited their institute at Kilpauk for a few years. Vasu decided to conduct workshops in Delhi and kolkata.  I visited and lectured in both workshops. I saw some engineers using spreadsheets to calculate energy efficiencies- impressive. 
During 1988 , we conducted a workshop on Vedic mathematics. I organised the workshop at Sankar Mutt, Chamrajpet.  It was inaugurated by Mr Veerappa Moily , Minister for education and Dr Vidyasagar , from CAIR gave the keynote. The lectures were delivered by Prof Bhanumurthy based on his book. I got support from Prof R Narasimha, then director of NAL. As a part of the workshop, we had a brief half a day paper presentations by researchers. Prof MN Channabasappa from KREC was one of the paper presenters. I met him for the first time. We became good friends. I visited KREC and later also SIT Tumkur where he became principal after retirement. 

I visited KREC surathkal during this period of 1989 or 1990 to attend their board of studies meeting. I was invited by Prof MN Channabasappa,  head of the mathematics department . They were running a masters program in systems analysis and computer applications. 
I had attended the board of studies meetings in several universities and autonomous colleges and RECs for several years. My intention was to help them to improve their curriculum as well as to educate the faculty  to  learn the reasons, objectives and processes of curriculum development. I had interest in curriculum development from the beginning. Even when I was a student, I used to discuss a few questions bygging me like
What will be the future directions of engineering?
What should we learn to get equipped for the changes?
Is our curriculum modern and relevant?
What will be the directions in which India should move for reducing poverty?
What job should I choose- academic or industry?
I got some confusing answers. 
But I realised a few aspects then itself but not clearly.
1.our curriculum is dated, old and not in the future direction .
2.many new areas are emerging like computers and electronics. Engineering is complex.
3. There was no cross learnings between disciplines. Electrical engineering was more advanced in modeling and analysis but other disciplines were behind. But they didn't learn from electrical engineering. Mechanical was more focussed on design ,others were not. Civil concentrated on engineering practices and diversity like foundations, transportation, hydraulics etc. Each discipline is a fortress not to be encroached by others.
4. Nehru's  approach to the Indian economy was focussed towards socialism and heavy industries like Russia. We felt it would fail. 
5. We should not depend on what the college teaches us , what the university tells us about what to learn through their outdated  curriculum . We should learn a lot more by reading books and articles. 

So I cultivated a deep interest in self education by  reading many books and articles in the libraries .
 Once I joined iisc ,i  focussed on curriculum modernisation.  I understood the various processes of education and curriculum. I understood that the role of curriculum is central to education particularly for engineers ,  though deep and analytical  contents, delivery, experiments , library studies are important. If the curriculum is old, then there is no opportunity to become a good practicing engineer.
That is why I played a major role in converting iisc education system into a credit system based, and  electives based program. That was a great learning experience for me. For more than 10 years , I assisted iisc faculty in understanding the grading system and awarding grades correctly. So whenever I visited colleges - that is hundreds of times- and interacted with many young and senior faculty members, I used to ask them “ why don't you modernize your curriculum “.Most evaded responsibility and said that it was the university's job.
When I attended the board of studies meeting , it normally  operated on two principles.
1.copy from  an existing program in some other university.
2.choose those topics , which  the faculty is comfortable to teach. 
This copying without any understanding is evident in the current undergraduate AI program. It is without focus, without thinking , and not even looking at   today's AI. Most curricula miss balancing and applications. They focus on theory. So I was dissatisfied with most boards of studies. 
And I found this meeting at KREC different. 
Let me discuss in my next post.
Greetings
Dks
14/10/24, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 507
“A shoe factory sends two marketing scouts to a region of Africa to study the prospects for expanding business. One sends back a telegram saying,
 
SITUATION HOPELESS STOP NO ONE WEARS SHOES
 
The other writes back triumphantly,
 GLORIOUS BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY STOP THEY HAVE NO SHOES”

The meeting organised by Prof MNC was different from the usual BOS meetings. Normally BOS meetings were held for about 3 hours and approve courses proposed by the university or college without substantive discussions on the curriculum or the focus of a program- who are the target audience, what do they become, where will they go etc ? 
Prof MNC wanted a three day meeting , my first surprise. I wasn't sure what he wanted to discuss in the meeting. So I went to Mangalore by bus . I took a local bus to KREC. I stayed in the guest house. Though I had visited and lectured at KREC before, this was my first stay there. I was shocked. There were no arrangements for food. I had to go to Surathkal for everything, but the bus service was good. KREC was on the highway and you got a bus every five minutes to Mangalore or Udupi .  I wasn't happy with the arrangements. 
When I went for the meeting,  I wasn't in a great mood, I was reluctant initially. But when I saw the academic commitment of Prof MNC  , my mood changed and I got involved in the meeting in full force as was my usual practice. Within a few minutes, MNC handed over the meeting to me. There were no other external experts. I was the only outsider. 
I started the discussion for the MTech Systems Analysis and computer applications program with the questions I posed above. I asked the question, “ what should be the unique value propositions of the program?” 
At that time, the concept of MCA was not known. Also most CS programs in universities were not focusing on applications. So I suggested that the program should focus on database applications. India had moved into data bases only by 1985. So it was an opportune time. Secondly , Oracle was getting traction and popularity. So we designed the curriculum accordingly. There were no protests, despite the fact that there were none to teach these courses in KREC. So my proposal was accepted. We spent the whole day deciding on the courses, contents and books. 
Next day, we took up for discussions the MTech program on Computer science and engineering run by MIT Manipal. Actually when this program started , I taught two courses like I did in MCE Hassan. Prof A Prabhakar was the principal. Prof S Rajaram,  my earlier  colleague in the EE department, IISc was the professor. So Rajaram came for the meeting. He had no idea about the program and no answers to my questions - what should be the focus of the program , what should we do to make it different from others- a value proposition? I suggested that while basic CS foundation courses can be taught in the first semester, we should focus on problem solving in the second semester. I taught at course on systems analysis and design and structured systems design. We used data flow methods. So I told him to start with that course. I suggested a good book for that purpose and told them to solve a large problem based on data flow approach. I was puzzled that most CS faculty were not aware of these techniques. Even my friend at TCS, Dr PSB Murty was  told by me about dataflow diagram, and he later told me that he talked to many faculty  and they had no idea of this approach.  It wasn't popular in India. I also suggested Yourdon's book on structured design as a second course. Again, the faculty were unfamiliar with these topics, but after a lot of persuasion from me and MNC, they agreed to my proposal. 
I also looked at one more program on an undergraduate course on computers run by the commerce teachers in a local Mangalore college. 
Prof MNC dropped me in the Hampanaghatta bus stand to return to bangalore. 
Let me talk about the two  followups  of this meeting. 
Greetings 
Dks
15/10/24, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 508
“Teachers act as instructors who design and deliver instruction. They often act as trainers who provide exercises and drills to help improve their students’ skills. They also coach their students with supportive encouragement and appropriate comments. Finally, they act as tutors who often provide individual help. Teachers often use various educational approaches that will help their students learn in a variety of ways.”
Michael Blocher. Digital tools for knowledge construction

I was requested by KREC to give a series of lectures on databases to faculty and students of SACA program. Padmanabha from Shimoga was a student. He helped me a lot. Dr Mohan Hegde, Dr Desikachar,  prof Raghupati Bhat and most of the faculty of Mathematics department became my friends. I met Prof NR Shetty, principal during my visits. I helped them to select a new faculty - Hosmane was selected as a professor in SACA. I became a regular visitor to KREC from that time onwards. I met Prof  Balaveera Reddy from mechanical engineering . We went for an AICTE inspection to a college in kerala. I stayed in the KREC guest house regularly . The caretaker became  a good friend of mine. KREC built a few good  guest rooms and I used to stay there. 
My student from IIT Bombay,  Mr Murthy joined KREC in the computer science department. He was the first computer science trained faculty. 
The second followup deals with my course on systems analysis and design . I had a friend , Mr Satish Tanga from my early days with TCS . He left TCS and started a consultancy company in bangalore. I met him several times . He bought a design tool and wanted to conduct training to the institutions where he sold the tool. I became the main speaker in his program. I found Rajaram from MIT as a participant in one course. So I was happy He took my advice seriously and decided to provide a software engineering focus to their MTech program.  My association with Tanga lasted for about  two decades till 2000. 
As I said earlier, i was busy doing many inspections for AICTE  in many colleges  kerala , karnataka and Tamilnadu. 
During the early nineties , both Profs NR Shetty and Reddy moved to bangalore- Prof Shetty as Vice chancellor of Bangalore university and Prof Reddy as DTE. My involvements with both University and DTE increased.

Greetings
Dks
16/10/24, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   509
“The only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is great work. And the only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you haven’t found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle. As with all matters of the heart, you’ll know when you find it.”
—Steve Jobs

Let me recall the fact that we completed the 66 kv substation work and inaugurated it in 1987. Let us look at two incidents that happened afterwards. 
The first one was a major disaster. 
After the inauguration of our 66kv substation in 1987,  I didn't want to ask our maintenance team to take care of our 66kv substation.  My experience with our maintenance staff after the first reform in IISc power supply completed in 1968-69 with  the installation of the 11kv ring main wasn't  good. They were not competent to run this system.  They knew only some minor electrical  work in buildings.  So we decided to handover maintenance to BSES, the contractors of our 66 kv project . It was a major decision , but it has worked till now effectively. BSES  agreed and appointed Mr Gopal Rao as engineer in charge. Both Mr Hegde , manager and Mr Balakrishnan , senior engineer  who executed the project for us, both from the local office of BSES, were very helpful. 
Our new substation was running smoothly. Then a tragedy struck after some months of operations. 
They decided to clean a 11 kv  pole near the amenities block and close to our B block staff quarters as a routine maintenance work . As is the standard  practice, they switched off power to the line and started cleaning. Two workers were cleaning the bushings by climbing the pole. Unfortunately, some operator in the substation was not aware of this important maintenance work. So he switched on the 11 kv power supply  on that line by mistake and a disaster struck . Both electricians working on the pole were electrocuted. It became a major problem. By the time I went there  , Mr Nagaraj, our maintenance supervisor, was making a big public issue of it. Someone sent a photo to the newspapers which was published the next day prominently.  I met Prof CNR and apprised him about this. It brought bad publicity to IISc and the project  engineering department.
We called Both Hegde and Balakrishnan and   told them to compensate the families . I personally supervised the compensation. Most of the compensation was put as an FD in a bank and only a small amount was given as cash to the wife. 
The second incident was the failure of the 66kv/11kv transformer. 
Unfortunately, within 18 months , it failed . It was under warranty.  So Cromptons had a legal obligation to repair it . But they refused . I told them to go ahead with repairing  work so that we get the transformer at the earliest back in service. The transformer was shipped to Mumbai. Fortunately ,the old 11kv supply from KEB , near our gymkhana ,  was still in place. So we could switch back and IISc had a power supply , though the load had to be limited. 
I visited Cromptons and met the vice-president to resolve the payment terms. Fortunately,  while we went for inspection of the transformer during its manufacture and before installation at IISc in 1986,  I wasn't happy with the HV test. So, I had asked Thimme Gowda to put a rider in the test certificate that the full HV test wasn't done. So I showed him the test certificate. He was convinced and waived the cost of repair including materials. After about six weeks, the repaired transformer was reinstalled and put back to service. We restored the  66kv supply. 
So we are back to a reliable supply. 
Greetings
Dks.
17/10/24, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 510
“There is bias in the nature of technology that tilts it in certain directions and not others. All things being equal, the physics and mathematics that rule the dynamics of technology tend to favor certain behaviors. These tendencies exist primarily in the aggregate forces that shape the general contours of technological forms and do not govern specifics or particular instances. For example, the form of an internet—a network of networks spanning the globe—was inevitable, but the specific kind of internet we chose to have was not. The internet could have been commercial rather than nonprofit, or a national system instead of international, or it could have been secret instead of public.”
Kevin Kelly.    What technology wants.

Then three  incidents pertaining to the power system of IISc  happened .
Firstly, Mr Thimme Gowda went back to KEB. 
Another engineer , Mr. Prithviraj was deputed to IISc by KEB. He concentrated on only household consumer problems and was familiar with only that level of power supply. He didn't get involved with 66kv. Immediately after joining , he organised a meeting with representatives from all departments with a view to know their problems . I thought it was a good idea and I  was happy with him. He wanted to garland me in the meeting.  I refused saying that it wasn't our custom and practice. 
But soon I found his knowledge level was low and he created many problems. He couldn't get along with our estate officer, Mr Munivenkataswamy. He had a big fight with him. So he was sent back after a short stint at IISc.  
Mr Gururaj ,another KEB engineer was deputed to IISc in his place. He was working in IIM  Bangalore on deputation  and I had met him there when I used to go there to teach the computer course . He became another great friend of mine and continues to be my great friend even now.  He helped me in many circumstances. 
Secondly, I decided to have a second transformer So that continuity of supply can be ensured. I had to convince Prof CNR about it. In the end he agreed to it. So we floated a tender and bought a second transformer. The substation has been working satisfactorily till now. I am happy to have provided a long term good solution to IISc's power needs. 


Thirdly, after a year of operations, BSES decided that they won't continue the operations. So we needed to look for another agency. Mr Kumar,  of Kumar electricals limited was doing a lot of electrical contracts work at IISc  for some years. So we entrusted this work to him. They continued with the operation of the IISc power system for many decades. Later he did the re-engineering of vidhana soudha substation under my supervision and also Jayadeva institute of cardiology work. I had a long association with him. 

Our estate officer was also changed after a few years. Mr Chikkappa joined as  the estate officer on Mr KC Reddy's recommendations.  We became good friends. Our friendship continues till now. 
More in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
18/10/24, 5:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 511
“Years ago, psychologists discovered that there are two routes to achievement: conformity and originality. Conformity means following the crowd down conventional paths and maintaining the status quo. Originality is taking the road less traveled, championing a set of novel ideas that go against the grain but ultimately make things better.
 Of course, nothing is completely original, in the sense that all of our ideas are influenced by what we learn from the world around us. We are constantly borrowing thoughts, whether intentionally or inadvertently. We’re all vulnerable to “kleptomnesia”—accidentally remembering the ideas of others as our own. By my definition, originality involves introducing and advancing an idea that’s relatively unusual within a particular domain, and that has the potential to improve it.”
Adam Grant.      Originals

While I was continuing with AICTE visits to engineering colleges for approvals- for renewals and starting new ones-, I got more new activities added to my workload. 
The Institution of Engineers had a procedure for memberships - it  approved the BE degree awarded by colleges for recognition of the college and award of memberships to their students. This was done through  a visit by a committee to the colleges and inspect their lab facilities. I got involved in this. I visited several colleges in Mumbai , Pune , Nanded, Nagpur, Shiggaon, Badnera, and many other cities for this purpose. 
  I was also the chair of the computer engineering board of the institution.  This meant I had two sets of travels - one for the computer engineering board meetings and another for the inspections of colleges for approval by IE. In addition,  I attended the annual convention of the computer engineering board. I also gave keynote addresses and talks at many of the conferences of the institution and engineers day programs. I attended and gave a talk on “agricultural residues and their uses “ at the agricultural engineering convention held at Jabalpur. 
I participated in the discussions conducted by Doordarshan on “the role of engineers”  every year on sept 15th , the engineers day celebrated by the institution of engineers.   After some time,  this program was to be done in kannada and still I participated in it and spoke in kannada. Mrs Rukmani,  the director,  talked to me and I along with the Doordarshan staff made a short 10 minute program on the environment. I quoted chamakam there. 

In addition, I conducted two major conferences  for the Institution of Engineers - one on “the future directions of  communications “ in association with Bangalore Doordarshan, another on microprocessor based design with NDRF. I wanted to get Prof U R Ananthamurthy, author of the novel Samskara , who was the vice chancellor of Mahatma Gandhi university,  Kottayam at that time ,in the early nineties. He agreed to come at  first   , But later,  he decided against it when I said that we didn’t have a budget for his trip to bangalore.  We got Prof U R Rao to inaugurate the conference. His speech was disappointing. He didn't give futuristic directions to communications but talked about the past and even defended the S band and C band that was used by the department of space against the use of K, Ka, Ku bands for communications. He wasn't aware of the higher gigahertz frequencies.  Also we wanted to look at the opening up of communications to the private sector and the use of computers in communications. Most speakers had no idea about the future of radio, TV and print media. Mobile was still not on the Indian horizon at that time. But ISRO was putting into orbit communications satellites at regular intervals , thereby providing a number of channels for broadcasting . 
Greetings
Dks
19/10/24, 5:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 512

“If you "understand  something in only one way, then you scarcely understand it at all—because when you get stuck, you'll have nowhere to go. But if you represent something in several ways, then when you get frustrated enough, you can switch among different points of view, until you find one that works for you! Accordingly, when we design machines to mimic our minds—that is, to create Artificial Intelligences—we'll need to make sure that those machines, too, are equipped with sufficient diversity: If a program works in only one way, then it gets stuck when that method fails. But a program that has several ways to proceed could then switch to some other approach, or search for a suitable substitute. “
Marvin Minsky.      Emotion machine 


Let me look at another major activity that was  initiated by the department of electronics, government of India, on computer training. 
At that time there were several thousands of computer training institutes in the country. There were no standards. Most were not even employing competent trainers, didn't have enough PCs for training and their training programs were dated. 
When Datamatics started it's training programs in bangalore, they had a strong concern for quality. They produced a lot of teaching materials and got experienced people to teach. That is why I was part of their Fortran, Autocoder and Cobol training programs from 1971 to 1978. It was a satisfying experience for me to train hundreds of engineers in our industries on Fortran and other languages. Also there were severe scarcity of Fortran programmers at that time. I was the only person with good programming experience even at IISc and helped many not only in IISc,  but also in many organizations like NAL, ISEC,  CMTI , CPRI, electricity boards , NGEF etc. So I felt that training institutions were needed to play an important role to train thousands of programmers needed by the country in the coming decades. So I supported them. 
But by the mid eighties,  the situation became bad. To give an example of the degradation of training qualities , let me give an example. A neighbor of mine with minimal knowledge of programming and no experience ran a training institute in his house. He was the sole trainer. He had one or two PCs. He gave talks but didn't allow students to use computers and write programs. Small programs were written in notebooks by the trainees, that is all the practical usage. 
To top it all , many such institutions advertised that the students joining them  should keep their passport ready. It implied that most got jobs abroad after a few months training. Even reputed institutions did this kind of advertising. So in 1986 I wrote in Times of India an article entitled “ computer alchemists” revealing the sad state of computer training institutions. 
So the department of electronics set up a centre - DOEACC - Department of electronics accreditation of computer courses- . It accredited training institutions across India and also conducted examinations for different levels of computer competencies  . It also awarded certificates. So I inspected many training institutes in Bangalore for this accreditation for a few years. The initiative lost its zeal in a few years after it's initiator - Brig. Sundaram retired. 
Greetings
Dks
20/10/24, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 513
“We can’t stop artificial intelligences and robots from improving, creating new businesses, and taking our current jobs. It may be against our initial impulse, but we should embrace the perpetual remixing of these technologies. Only by working with these technologies, rather than trying to thwart them, can we gain the best of what they have to offer. I don’t mean to keep our hands off. We need to manage these emerging inventions to prevent actual (versus
hypothetical) harms, both by legal and technological means. We need to civilize and tame new inventions in their particulars. But we can do that only with deep engagement, firsthand experience, and a vigilant acceptance.”
Kevin Kelly.      The inevitable.
Another big controversy erupted in the nineties.  The government was experimenting and building microprocessor based standalone voting machines at ECIL, Hyderabad.   During this period in the early nineties,  the government was proposing the use of electronic voting machines in our general elections. It is still a whipping boy even now. Though ECIL developed a prototype by the late seventies and it was used in an election in the early eighties, Supreme Court ruled  its use in elections as illegal. Later the laws were amended and it was PV Narasimha Rao's government that decided to use EVMs in elections. This led to a massive protest . Mr VP Singh who was a Prime minister earlier  made a public attack with a demo on the manipulations possible with an EVM. But he didn't use an EVM for his public demo , but a PC with a program developed and accessible openly .  He got a programmer to show the manipulations. 
I was approached to defend the EVM. I agreed and visited BEL. I met Mr Rangarajan, - known as Sujatha , a Tamil writer- who was in charge of production of the EVMs . I had met him in three or four meetings / panel discussions before and knew him. 
To digress a bit, one discussion meeting I attended with him was in the local chapter of IETE along with Prof Sonde. The topic was the future of PCs.  I talked about the popularity of PCs due to its word processing capability.  Many misunderstood my intention and said it should be used for scientific work only. Rangarajan came to my rescue saying that he uses a PC extensively for typing his fiction and that he found it very convenient. See the mindset of these ,most senior communications engineers, that a computer is a precious tool and must be used only for important scientific work and not for frivolous typing. I told them also that we had been popularising kannada word processing software. If you look at today , you find that PCs are mostly used for typing , messaging and video talking by most people, very little scientific work takes place in a PC. Of course today's PCs are capable of doing a lot of scientific work and are used by scientists extensively. 
Back to the EVMs,  I gave a press conference rebutting the claims of VP Singh. I said “ this EVM is not a PC. It is a standalone machine. It can’t be programmed. The operational program is burnt in a ROM. So it can’t be changed. It is not connected to a network so remote manipulation is not possible. It is better than the manual system as it avoids booth capturing “. I am not familiar with the changes done and the configuration of today's machines . But my views are correct as proven all these years by clean elections and new procedures adopted to improve the election mechanism. EVMs are still going through a difficult path, never accepted by all. 
Greetings.
Dks
21/10/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 514
“In our new era, processes trump products.
This shift toward processes also means ceaseless change is the fate for everything we make. We are moving away from the world of fixed nouns and toward a world of fluid verbs. In the next 30 years we will continue to take solid things—an automobile, a shoe—and turn them into intangible verbs. Products will become services and processes. Embedded with high doses of technology, an automobile becomes a transportation service, a continuously updated sequence of materials rapidly adapting to customer usage, feedback, competition,innovation, and wear. Whether it is a driverless car or one you drive, this transportation service is packed with flexibility, customization, upgrades, connections, and new benefits.”
Kevin Kelly.         Inevitable 

My daughter completed her 10th standard CBSE exam in 1991 . She wanted to study state PUC instead of 11th and 12th in KV IISc. At that time , I was advising MES college in setting up their computer centre and I selected their computers , furniture and their faculty. I had regular meetings in MES college. So I had a close association with Mr.MPL Sastry , secretary and Prof. Seshadri Iyengar, principal. I talked to them and got my daughter admitted to PUC in  MES. It was a well known college in Bangalore and I hoped she would get a better education. She moved from a class of 30 students to one with more than 120 students. Lectures weren't great. During the second PUC, she decided not to join any tutorials courses which were  training students for admissions for BE courses in karnataka. After her successful completion of PUC , she first joined Mount Carmel college for the BSc journalism course along with her friend Priya. Later she got admissions for BSc in speech and hearing in Ali yavar Jung institute in Mumbai and joined there. Some friends asked me “ why are you sending her to Mumbai at a young age?”. AL Sriram , my nephew, helped her in getting  into college. 
I created several  opportunities to visit Mumbai and see her. 
 I went for an inspection at Nasik for circuit breakers testing for a visit.  Mr Gururaj , our electrical engineer, also accompanied me. My co brother ,ABL, also came with us to Nasik so that we can go to Trimbakeshwar temple. We returned to Bombay and stayed in BSNL guest house.  I was returning to Bangalore  early in the morning the next day . I told my daughter that I will see her and take her to the airport and then Gururaj will drop her in chedda nagar. She came out of the building , but in the darkness didn't see the glass , she came through a glass partition, and the glass broke, such a flimsy partition. She wasn't hurt. I was worried, requested Gururaj to take care of her and left for bangalore. Gururaj took her to chedda nagar and left her there. 
During that period, I was invited by the electrical engineers training institute run by Indian railways in Vadodara for its engineers to give lectures on energy efficiencies. I had to go via Bombay and so I agreed to give the lectures in Vadodara.  I went there regularly for about three years so that I could spend time with my daughter in Bombay.  So I visited my daughter several times during her BSc days. 
Greetings 
Dks
22/10/24, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 515
“What a person needs to understand is the observation made by sociologists and economists that there is a direct link between the emergence of an information-centric economy and the expansion of the service sector of the same economy at the expense of the agricultural and industrial sectors. In other words, as a percentage of the total economy of an advanced industrial society, providing services increased regardless of whether or not the economy as a whole grew in size. Again, depending on whose numbers you consult, in the U.S., for instance, the service sector is sometimes recorded as high as 75 to 80 percent of the Gross National Product, with lower percentages for Western Europe and East Asia.”
21st century business.     James Cortada


I thought that the nineties would reduce my involvement and reduce my workload.  But the opposite happened. My involvement increased. 
The computer scene changed a lot. PCs were available at lower costs. Many manufacturers supplied PCs. Slowly , many started assembling PCs after liberalization by the NarasimhaRao government.  So we had a dispute between branded and unbranded PCs. 
The demand for PCs increased in the departments of the Karnataka government .  Some departments like commercial taxes went for major computerization projects. That increased the demands for servers, PCs,  printers etc. So  the Karnataka government technical advisory panel decided to introduce rate contracts for PCs, printers and other accessories. The sub committee was entrusted with this work. We needed to talk to vendors and arrive at acceptable prices for PCs,  memory, disks, printers etc. It became a major activity. We needed to revise the prices at regular intervals as and when PC prices were reduced. So my workload increased. We standardize the configurations . We set up a standard procedure for the fixation process . We introduced two separate  parts - technical and commercial- tendering for the first time. Our prices were the lowest in the country. 
There was an instance when DST, government of India,  wanted to buy PCs and a server. They got a quote of around rs.8 lakhs for a server. Our rate contract price for the same server was around rs.3 lakhs. So they told me to procure it through KSCST. 
Our process of rate contracts became a standard for purchase by many government associated groups. 
KSCST decided to get my approvals for purchases of computers and accessories. Ramesh from KSCST worked with me. All KSCST purchases were done after my approval. I had some problems with some people. 
KPC, Karnataka power corporation,  requested my help to buy computers, set up their computer centre and even recruit officers for the computer centre. Mr Suryanarayanan , company secretary , R Balasubramanian and Nellaiappan became my good friends . I had many interactions with KPC. 
Karnataka land army corporation requested me to assist them regarding their computer purchases. Mr Lucose Vallatharai ,  IAS was the MD then. He even got me felicitated by Mr JH Patel, then Chief Minister of Karnataka. 
I had an interesting encounter with the Bangalore dairy. They had outsourced their accounting and payroll work to a small company on a monthly retainer. The company gave a new proposal - Dairy should buy a new computer, and pay double the amount for the company to do its monthly work. I laughed at the proposal and vetoed it. 
Later KSRTC requested  my help on many matters regarding their computer activities. I met several MDs and EDs of KSRTC and interacted with them for more than ten years. I remember Mr Srikumar IPS, and Mr Bhaskar Rao IPS . 
Let me discuss some more activities in the next posts.
Greetings 
Dks
23/10/24, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 516
“In addition to technology’s ability to satisfy (and create) desires, and to occasionally save labor, it did something else. It brought new opportunities. Right before my eyes I saw online networks connect people with ideas, options, and other people they could not possibly have met otherwise. Online networks unleashed passions, compounded creativity, amplified generosity. At the very cultural moment when pundits declared that writing was dead, millions began writing online more than they ever had written before. Exactly when the experts declared people would only bowl alone, millions began to gather together in large numbers. Online they collaborated, cooperated, shared, and created in myriad unexpected ways.”
Kevin Kelly.       What technology wants

The nineties saw a major improvement in IT. Computers started transforming into IT. The introduction of computer networking based on ethernet and Arpanet and the introduction of internet , world wide web and html  brought in a new changed era. The first effect was email. IISc  started operating email services using ernet, a government designed network connecting all IITs, IISc,  and later government departments with an external gateway. Later dialup was introduced by BSNL. So email slowly picked up in india. We used email to connect with faculty in western universities and even students. I couldn't connect with people in India for more than a decade. I needed to use regular postal services only to reach people in India. 
Only in the early 21st century,  broadband came in. Then connectivity became easy for most metro people. While the internet came slowly in India, LAN picked up traction in many organizations. I took responsibility for creating local area networks in Vidhana soudha , KREC, CPRI, BMSCE, SJIC, and many engineering colleges. 
Fortunately , as a futuristic action ,most colleges started information Engineering courses. We also started the BCA program in a big way in karnataka and I approved the BCA run by many colleges after inspection . 
By the late nineties , many industries and institutions had both local networks , campus networks and broadband. Wide area network also picked up pace by then . Most banks moved into both LAN and WAN and operated them well. 
So by 2000, we had a good IT architecture developed  in many  industries , banks , offices of governments due to NIC, engineering colleges, research institutions and all IT companies . We got a reasonable depth of IT culture by 2000. While we were good at IT use and IT services, we were weak in IT components , devices and software development.  That state continues even now.
More in next
Greetings 
Dks
24/10/24, 4:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 517
“For good or ill, forming crowds comes so naturally to our species that it is even seen as a fundamental political right. It is codified in the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which notes that “the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances” shall not be infringed by law. The right to assemble is similarly encoded in constitutions of countries all over the world, from Bangladesh to Canada to Hungary to India.2 As with the capacity for empathy, the inclination to assemble into groups and deliberately choose friends and associates is part of our species’ universal heritage.”  

Nikolas Christakis       blueprint 

The 21st century started with people centric technology applications. Computers and communications were developing hand in hand. Communications embraced  digital. 
While common people didn't take to emails  easily ,they picked up both text and video messaging fast. A very large population today uses WhatsApp,  skype,  Google,  easily. Many use social networks. Instagram has become popular. Many use twitter . We are spoilt by choices. 
While in the late  20th century , our computer activities  concentrated mostly on the use of computers and services by industries and organizations , the 21st century saw the focus shift to computer use by   people. With mobile services and smartphones, democratization of technology was achieved . It has reached most people - billions - literate or not, wealthy or poor , educated or not, professional or laborer, -  through these many avenues - social networks, messaging, video talks, youtube,  net banking, ecommerce  etc- of fast communications. These changes have provided a great source for knowledge and awareness dissemination. All of us   know what is happening globally, how things work, what to buy and where and how, what to watch and when and where to watch, how to be healthy, what to eat,etc . So today knowledge and learning is democratized, reaching all people  at low costs. 
Today's world is running on data . Data is expected to be  at our command ,but it is also enslaving us, and changing our habits. One should be aware of the implications.  
AI - artificial intelligence is also reaching our doorsteps now. The latest - genAI- will get us contents from across the world, put it together in an acceptable form for our understanding. Many jobs will become redundant, many will become easier . Alexa and Siri talk to us and execute simple commands. AI will not only do many  jobs automatically with robots and drones , but also will make us more informed, more knowledgeable,  more understood and more intelligent people, if we are careful . Else we end up as its slave. We can’t ignore AI. We need to become AI literate. 
I feel sad that we are not taking advantage of the learning facilities available on tap. Even literate, educated and professionals don't take full advantage of the various knowledge programs. Serious computer science lectures by reputed and renowned faculty from the world are available free now. We need to put our children through this alternate education and learning route. I have seen the impact of these media  on the intellect of my grandson, Neel.  He acquired enormous knowledge through these routes , not just through schools. It opened my eyes definitely to the vast unused resources out there. 
Greetings
Dks
25/10/24, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 518
“ in 1802, Johann Beckmann, an economics professor at Gottingen University in Germany, gave this ascending force its name. Beckmann argued that the rapid spread and increasing importance of the useful arts demanded that we teach them in a “systemic order.” He addressed the techne of architecture, the techne of chemistry, metalwork, masonry, and manufacturing, and for the first time he claimed these spheres of knowledge were interconnected. He synthesized them into a unified curriculum and wrote a textbook titled Guide to Technology (or Technologie in German), resurrecting that forgotten Greek word. He hoped his outline would become the first course in the subject. It did that and more. It also gave a name to what we do.”
Kevin Kelly 
I was involved with the computerization activities in many organizations. Let me look at some issues in computer usages in some organizations in India. 
Indian railways came up with a passenger reservations system and were looking for a similar system for goods. So CRIS approached me to help them. I gave my advice on their hardware purchases. 
The sizing of servers was a guess work at that time and even now. Most organizations had no proper past data . They can’t estimate their workload. The  goods booking problem is new and so they couldn't estimate the workload.  They first considered the data general mini computer sold by Patni computers and got no clarity. So they met me- Mr Thoopal, Mr Ramakrishnan , and Mr Rao. I said that the datageneral mini is not as good as digital VAX mini from design point of view. I also agreed with them that Patni didn't look very professional. I got the same impression when I visited Patni in 1982 at the invitation of my student , Lakshminarasimha  and they all - Narayana murthy, Nandan , Kris, and others - took me for lunch. I had discussions with the CRIS group and recommended the VAX mini of digital. Digital had a manufacturing base in Bangalore and Mr Som  Mittal was in charge. They agreed with my suggestion. Then they requested me to give a series of lectures to their staff on computers and I gave about six lectures. During my stay there, I got an invitation from the CSIO lab of CSIR to give a talk in their conference. I went there with T Viswanathan who was in INSDOC at that time. I stayed in Lodhi hotel in Delhi which had a woodlands restaurant.  I saw Mr Gundu Rao, former CM of Karnataka there. 
 I encountered this problem of hardware sizing on many occasions in many organizations  .  Let me look at some examples.
Greetings
Dks
26/10/24, 3:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 519
“ Human nature contains much that is admirable, including the capacity for love, friendship, cooperation,and learning, all of which allows us to form good societies and fosters understanding among people everywhere. Death and grief unite us like nothing else. The universality of death and of our responses to it cannot help but impress human similarity upon any observer.”
Christakis         Blue print 

Mr Joshi, retired GM, Indian bank,  comments on sizing . 
“Sir , you advised  us on sizing of our Banks hardware , since banking transaction increase has never got been predicted . Very difficult to imangine organic and fresh new transitions. Also in data available. 
Your advise was very very helpful and Bank has been benefited tremendously.”
My response 
Thanks. We did a stress test to check the throughput. In such cases, I always look for the queue buildup to check the dynamics. 
I insisted on a stress test for PNB also. I have conducted several such tests for sizing for many organizations. 
Let me return to sizing history. 
APMC Gadag was a well managed one and Mr D R Patil was the chair of the APMC. Mr D R Patil was a very enterprising and innovative textiles entrepreneur. Mr Jayakumar Anagol talked about the annual report brought out by the all india organization of textile manufacturers of which he was the chair. He wanted to computerize some operations of this APMC in the mid eighties. It was a pioneering effort. 
Mr Vasan was running a Consulting company in Malleswaram . Amarnath Bhat, KSCST  systems analyst, also joined him. I inaugurated their office. Vasan was providing IT support to APMC .

When we bought computers for APMC , Gadag  , there weren't many servers. Even the server concept itself  was evolving. Companies either had a main frame which was very expensive - close to a crore of rupees and needed large infrastructure and human talent to run it. Or the choice of many companies was a mini. As I said earlier, both VAX and data general were popular then in india. Indian manufacturing came up with TDC 12, 16, 32 by ECIL later. They were PDP11 based minis. But they were not popular. So stand alone higher end PCs were sold by Zenith, HCL, ORG and NELCO. Many organizations bought these computers. 
 At that time - mid eighties- , Eiko came up with its PCs at a very low cost . The market prices of the computers of Zenith, HCL were very high - four to five times that of the Eiko computers. It was a great strategy by Eiko. But their machine was smaller than the Zenith or HCL machines. ORG called its computer a mini. 
. Mr D R Patil  had a good clarity on a pain point of the farmers and so defined a limited purpose for computerisation - to reduce the turnaround time for farmers visiting the APMC to sell their produce. The time taken was about two days for a farmer  to bring his produce, weigh it , get it graded, participate in an auction, get the money from the buyer and return to his village. DR Patil thought that he needed to reduce this two day wait time to less than a day and introduced this automation. It was partial automation. But as the cost of the computers were low , we used the same computers for data entry , totalling of available produce from all farmers ,  vendor quotes, selection , accounting and settlements. The principle was to divide the jobs into many small ones and do each in an Eiko computer. Since we selected a lower cost computer with lower capacity, sizing was to be done carefully. We divided the tasks and used several  computers.  I inaugurated their APMC  computer centre .  It worked well for some time. But the system got overloaded quickly . 
More in the next post
Greetings
Dks
26/10/24, 4:46 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sir, very interesting approach of dividing the work on Eiko computers!! Thanks again and again for sharing these interesting insights! <This message was edited>
27/10/24, 5:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 520
According to Kelly, people are just bit players; they only have a walk-on role in the digital revolution. It is an illusion to think that people shape technology; in reality, it is the other way round. Kelly agrees that technology needs people before it can move on to the next stage of its development, but this does not mean that people are the key factor. We are just the extras, the minor actors in the drama that will allow technology to become what it must. It is an unusual philosophy,
Kevin Kelly 

Let me continue with another involvement of mine on sizing.
  Before I do that, I should talk about my involvement in a fourth dimension of activities. Most know my educational , academic and research activities. Later , many saw my involvement in computerization , IT and allied industries based activities. By 1980, a third dimension was my work on ecology and environment which started with Bedthi hydro project , moved on to my government job to my study of Uttara kannada , Tumkur villages energy planning activities and continued with carrying capacity studies for Dakshina Kannada district. I also had involvement with social activities. 
But I was involved for about four decades in another sector that not many are aware of- finance and banking. 

I gained my first glimpse of accounting and ledgers and cheques , drafts and mail transfer when I was in primary school - in the third , fourth standard days. My uncle was continuing his father's  business of money lending as a means of supplementary income. Since I used to sit with my uncle and assist him during all his activities,  I became familiar with p note, interest rates, registration of loan deeds etc during that period itself . 
Secondly, he organised and conducted two major annual functions- Sri Rama Navami  and Sankara Jayanthi during summer time in April and May months. These were supported financially by donations from hundreds of people living all over the country and also in Singapore.  He was very meticulous with accounting of receipts and expenses and produced a complete balanced sheet - a very detailed one - at the end of each function, printed it and sent by post to all. So he built a ledger for receipts city wise and group wise as well as for expenses with a well defined groupings of expenses. I helped him in maintaining the accounts and creation of the ledger. So I knew some aspects of accounting internals ,budgeting and finance management. I learnt the importance of integrity and transparency from him. 

My knowledge of banking procedures like credit, debit, loans, drafts, savings and deposit accounts, ledger , tallying , etc started from my school days, quite early. I started having an account and managing it when I was in PUC. I got money through MT. I continued my banking from those days with a good external view. 
But my internal and detailed views started in 1972 when I started working on online transactions, Monte carlo simulation , performance measurements etc. I was teaching computer simulation then and did the bank's transaction processing simulations with  a set of cooked up data. I got my first  experience of  a computerised multi branch connected banking exposure at Westminster Bank in Manchester in 1974. I opened an account in one branch and operated that account from another branch. 
Let me continue this in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
28/10/24, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 521
“When George W. Bush gained in the polls, Republicans rated him as more desirable, but so did Democrats, who were already preparing justifications for the anticipated status quo. The same happened when Al Gore’s likelihood of success increased: Both Republicans and Democrats judged him more favorably. Regardless of political ideologies, when a candidate seemed destined to win, people liked him more. When his odds dropped, they liked him less.
 Justifying the default system serves a soothing function. It’s an emotional painkiller: If the world is supposed to be this way, we don’t need to be dissatisfied with it. But acquiescence also robs us of the moral outrage to stand against injustice and the creative will to consider alternative ways that the world could work.”
 Adam Grant                        Originals 

Let me look at my  initial involvement  in the banking  field. 
I had been involved for a very long time , several decades long till now,   with the use of computers in banking , fintech and branchless banking, a term coined by Mr BSamba Murthy, ex CMD, corporation bank and ex director,  IDRBT.  Actually the first major activity that I saw was in 1981 looking at the complications of interbank reconciliations being carried out by TCS for many banks. It opened my eyes to several aspects.
The complexity of a real life problem . It involved many aspects - sorting, searching, data cleaning , resolution , handling large volume data , batch processing. 
The need for reducing cpu usage through several optimisation processes like creating a combined key - it was a forerunner for the IFSC code used by banks today- , prioritizing transactions , etc. 
The complexity of software - in those early days of computing, it was a very large program. A big team was working on it. Its maintenance was a big problem.
Importance of documentation. Team members were changing frequently. A good document enables both the induction of new members into the team and in making the requisite changes in the software.
Project management . This was a tough task - cost estimation, getting the right mix of people, training them, rotating people, delivering on time. I saw a lot of software engineering concepts evolving in this project by TCS.
 TCS realized by then that banking is an important sector for them and focussed their attention to banking . They recruited many with domain expertise in banking in addition to both computer science and CA persons. 

My second involvement was creating awareness of technology to bankers. I gave several talks to bank staff. Banks by the early 1980s decided to look at computer technology and its introduction to handle big tasks in the bank. Some had seen the TCS work on interbank reconciliations.  So at the first instance , the banks outsourced some tasks to TCS and others. Later they decided to train some officers in COBOL programming.  It was a great and wise move. We ,at CSI , also conducted two or three courses  on COBOL programming exclusively for the officers of banks. Mr Ganapathi subramanian used to handle a majority of lectures. The course was held in the classroom in my department. 
Ganapathi was very good. He passed away after a few years due to cancer. I lost a wonderful person. 
The third involvement was wading into a controversy. RBI set up a committee under Prof Rangarajan for computerization in banks. There were two sequential reports of the  committee. 
I found several aspects there deserving attention. 
One was a serious one. The committee used CMC to specify a computer suitable for a branch. CMC wrote a specification for a computer suitable  for banks, a good job. But it over specified the specs. At that time , India was producing small mini computers by a few companies like Wipro, HCL and Sunray. CMC was selling the Sunray computers  . It was based on a US company model - Charlie river- . It used a different internal bus - VME bus. The specifications done by the Rangarajan committee included VME bus  as a requisite component of a computer. This upset all others. The pure Indian manufacturers used multibus. They can’t supply their minis to banks. So they were agitated. I also felt that this specification was not correct. There was no need to include VMEbus in the specs  and exclude Multibus.  I also felt that the sizing was arbitrary. 
I felt that branch automation is wrong. The first job should be a whole bank looking at creating a data base . 
Fortunately,  during the implementation stage, banks were allowed to select their systems. 
Let us look at my involvement with Canara bank for branch automation next.
Greetings
Dks
28/10/24, 4:58 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Good morning! I found this interesting quote from Prof Cameron Tonkinwise: “So-called-AI is a threat to human expertise, not because it replaces human expertise, but because it undermines how we learn to become experts.”
28/10/24, 5:00 am - Sanjay Chitnis: The learning theory says you learn more when you put more effort. Will AI undermine this?
29/10/24, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 522
Beckmann - “There is no communication between machines without extruded copper nerves of electricity. There is no electricity without mining veins of coal or uranium, or damming rivers, or even mining precious metals to make solar panels. There is no metabolism of factories without the circulation of vehicles. No hammers without saws to cut the handles; no handles without hammers to pound the saw blades. This global-scale, circular, interconnected network of systems, subsystems, machines, pipes, roads, wires, conveyor belts, automobiles, servers and routers, codes, calculators, sensors, archives, activators, collective memory, and power generators—this whole grand contraption of interrelated and interdependent pieces forms a single system.”
Kevin Kelly.       What technology wants. 

Let me look at some comments before continuing with a sizing fight for a machine for branch automation.  
Dr.  Sanjay Chitnis has this comment about APMC computerization. 
“Sir, very interesting approach of dividing the work on Eiko computers!! Thanks again and again for sharing these interesting insights!”
My response 
Thanks. It was an appropriate decision for that day. Credit goes to DR Patil. Gadag was the first APMC to go for computerization. But afterwards, we didn't see greater integrated automation of APMC functions and no APMC was fully automated. Computers found only office uses. Digitalization bypassed APMCs. 

Mr Joshi comments on my banking technology work.
“Sir , you are an allrounder. Your banking knowledge is exceptionally clear. I am lucky to have association with you. 
Regards”
“Sir , you know and understand banking better than bankers. Looking forward to next instalment 
Regards.”
My response
Thanks. I was brought up in an environment of generalization from childhood onwards. I was told to show interest in several areas including religion, community work, commerce and engineering.  Even in the engineering college ,I believed in all disciplines. I was strong in hydraulics, thermodynamics, economics  in addition to my core interests of Mathematics, electronics and electrical engineering.  That habit continues. 
In this era of narrow specialization,  we are neglecting  generalised and integrated approaches to view and understand problems and solve them in a general way. I strongly believe that in this era of AI, multidisciplinary Knowledge and thinking are necessary for successful problem solving. Even the digital era needed a domain plus tech expertise. Most techies need management skills. 

Aravind TCS has his recollections of early days in TCS.
“Nice recollection of the evolution of banking computerization. Vividly explained, Sir. Thanks. 
I only recall as a trainee, we were asked to work on Inter Branch Reconciliation, which as you rightly said was complex. Data cleaning by merely looking at blank fields, getting banks to look into their records, rectify the data with the log file was certainly time consuming. Then sorting was the next issue. Sorting was taking a lot of mainframe CPU time and we had to work out ways to optimize time for it, since CPU time was being billed. Huge volumes of data in several tapes was another challenge.  Production support of IBR was a great eye opener for young people like me during those days, to learn about so many things about computers, which became formalized as years went past.”
My response
Actually, we shunned formalism for a long time. Even documentation was not streamlined. I was shocked by the way  many in  TCS were correcting COBOL codes almost every day. Agility was existing even then. But these corrections were not fully recorded. It was a struggle. But the insistence on reduction of compilation helped.
Database was not used, only tape based files. Computer time was at a premium then due to stupid government policies of not allowing imports of computers.  
Greetings
Dks
30/10/24, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 523
Let me look at the branch automation issue. 
The banks started branch automation based on the  Rangarajan committee report during the late eighties. 
Canarabank requested me to advise them on their purchase. They had already selected a branch in Delhi- parliament street- for automation  and given a contract to Infosys to develop the software required for the automation of branch activities.
 I was against branch automation . I had seen better automation in 1973 itself in the banks in England . I saw fully  networked banking operations  in 1987 in Bangkok. And it was in the late eighties and early nineties that our Indian banks were initiating branch automation activities in a small way, not bank automation. 
But the grandiose name given to this branch automation by the Rangarajan committee was TBA- is it total bank automation , or total branch automation. The committee, I felt,  was ignorant of tech use in banks in other countries.
I felt that this partial automation will not be beneficial , total bank automation was needed with a centralised database - that is the key . I had another objection that the banks were seeing a simpler function of customer transactions , though it was very important .Computerization was a low priority for banks then.
I didn't want to express my views to the managers of Canara bank , but I agreed to assist them. Normally, I play a major lead role in the  projects with which I was involved. That was my way of putting effort and seeing that the project is executed properly. The  bank group had some young enthusiastic and aggressive officers. Only the two seniors ,the DGM and CM played a mature role. But expert knowledge was  lacking. Most technology decisions by banks were mostly  intuitive and so my expertise needed to be applied with caution. So , I played a subdued role in this project.  The bank’s group of officers  and Infosys development team  were both new to the task. Both were learning. The bank had a good, enthusiastic group of about five officers and they participated with vigour in all meetings. Infosys also had a good team led by Nandan at that time. 
The software was under development.
We were to decide on a suitable hardware to run the Infosys  software and provide faster services without interruption. But they were working in the dark without any data or discovery. I had at least a lot of exposure to sizing computers for IISc,  IIT Bombay and many other places and was familiar with the methodologies used for sizing an appropriate computer using simulation. 
Most people even now have no idea of the sizing methodology. Hardware sizing depends on
1.operating systems and applications.  software features
2.workload say tps 
3.software Capability on throughputs.
4.concurrency levels
5. 24by7 availability
6. Data management capabilities
7.Latencies
8.communications delays 
9 Business continuity
10.types of machines available.
Normally sizing is done through simulations of increasing workloads.
Regarding the state  of mini computers in India, the country  was not producing many computers at mini range. The minis were small minis. One of the known minis was produced by ORG. So the bank's young officers strongly supported the ORG machine. They had no basis for that decision. I was reluctant. I told them that you are doing an experiment, in a small unknown territory and you want to make it a success. ORG did not have proven reliable operations. Recovery of data by these systems was very poor leading to several hours , thereby resulting in a loss of customer service or the necessity of  resorting to manual operations. I told them about the example of Indian airlines computerization and how it created chaos in airports. So I suggested a low end Vax machine.  While the senior team was convinced about my arguments , the youngsters felt that it was a waste of money. Finally after a lot of hesitation , Nandan also suggested Vax . The bank decided on a Vax machine. 
All the youngsters moved up and got good careers , one joining Infosys,  two others joining other banks on a higher grade . They did well in their jobs. 
Greetings
Dks
30/10/24, 8:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Indian festivals are days of social interactions, enjoying over the success of good over evil and retrospection of our actions. 
Now is the time for the biggest global festival of Deepali celebrated in many countries. Let us rejoice with family , friends and neighbours and celebrate it with caution for health , concern for the weak, young and old, safety and environment . 
Have a nice Ganga snanam tomorrow. 
Greetings
Dks
31/10/24, 4:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 524
“Leadership in the digital transformation world is purposeful in its approach to creating a long term sustainable change. Change efforts will be designed in a top-down approach in some cases. And they will be constantly refined from the bottom-up.
The communication approach of digital executives is more like a campaign rather than a carefully refined command and control approach. Change activities are more likely to be a refine and reinforce approach.
The primary communication focus of the executives is one of why change is important rather than what is changing.”
Michael Wilson. Digital business transformation

Another instance where I got involved with the sizing/ selection of servers   happened in the mid nineties around 1994 or 95. 
The admissions for BE program in karnataka was done by a computer based ranking program . It was done by the karnataka government computer centre for a very long time - two or more decades. The ranking was done by the software and  seat allocation by DTE. While a lot of care was taken to conduct the data preparation and software run , the manual allocation was not effective. So the computer program was modified to rank and allocate colleges to individual candidates as per their choice list. This definitely was a great improvement. But it didn't work well.  The entire allotment process went through many iterations and took months. That was due to the students change requests and multiple options like JEE, Pilani, etc. 
So the government took a very far reaching and pioneering decision to do allotments with the direct involvement of the candidates and a quick computerized allotment and admission. Mr Venkatesan, officer in charge of NIC in karnataka took the entire responsibility of conducting the allotment activities. Admissions were done online. He was very committed to this job and did a remarkable job. 
The government created a CET cell to conduct the exams and do the  admissions also.  DTE had no role in this. Dr Reddy was appointed as officer in charge of the cell. The entire operations were meticulously planned . 
The technical advisory panel at that time was chaired by Mr Ghoshal. I was the chair of its technical subcommittee.  We discussed in detail the computer requirements. The TAP had very detailed discussions going upto 8pm on one day. The main issue was the servers. Venkatesan wanted to use the just announced Pentium machines. I said it wasn't proven and I wasn't sure about its reliability.  There was no scientific assessment of sizing. Concurrency was low dealing with about 5 to 10 at a time.  Finally the committee approved pentium  computers for the project. 
Venkatesan put all his resources including NIC computers to conduct the face to computer operations. He completed the task very successfully in the first year itself. It was a highly dedicated effort by his team. The entire process was over in a month itself and got the appreciation of all. 
Greetings
Dks
01/11/24, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 525
“This single treatise on the science of politics has been prepared mostly by bringing together the teaching of as many treatises on the science of politics as have been composed by ancient teachers for the acquisition and protection of the earth.”
Chanakya.       Arthasastra 

I was unhappy about adhocism adopted by many developers of software. 
India had and has  hundreds of companies developing software, most of them with a few programmers, but a few large ones . 
Software developers in india belong to the following categories
1.generic applications software developers . Examples are core banking development by TCS, Infosys , Oracle Financials etc. ERP developer like Ramco systems Marshall, loan module developers, local language processors etc. 
2.Proprietary software developers - this is a very large number of large and small units. They Custom built software for a client, and maintained it. 
3. Government software system developers , for Income tax, MCA, passport , etc. 
4. In House developers. Adhaar is a good example. 
5. System software developers like operating systems, compilers , databases etc. 
6. Small applications developers - accounting , payroll , admissions , etc . Thousands of small companies developed thousands of programs for many sectors and small and medium industries.  
There are many who maintain software and many who run software as a service. So it is a major industry in India. 
But the problem was that  the focus of these developers - they built software only to meet the functional requirements. But unfortunately, most didn't follow a good, well defined process. 
Further the bigger problem was that they thought that both normal offline software and online software follow the same principles. They didn't design for performance , growth, scaling etc. Actually, in the mid seventies, I taught a new course on real time systems and spent time explaining performance Issues. I followed Stimler’s book which had detailed calculations on performance. Queuing theory was introduced in operating systems by Prof Coffman of Penn state university.  
A software today deals with thousands or lakhs of concurrent processes , so design should be very different. But many including students and teachers use a mindset of building a batch processing ,functions only , software. They emphasize on the correctness of the results, but not on performance. 
This led to an interesting development. Moore’s law made processors gallop in speed and capacity and programs were executed faster. So developers never bothered about performance. There was a joke in the eighties and nineties - “what Grove gives, Gates takes it away. “ Grove is chief of Intel. Gates is Microsoft boss. So software design for performance is essential particularly for online systems. 
I got involved in many software performance problems. One of the major performance studies was done by TCS.  TCS demonstrated  to State Bank of India that their Bancs software will definitely handle the workload of SBI. Bala was in charge of this project. This software  is running successfully even now in SBI.
Let us see more software sizing in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
02/11/24, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 526
“Before one creates knowledge, one ought to thoroughly study the existing knowledge available.
The world of knowledge is continuously evolving. It always grows. The existing knowledge is expanded with the help of every generation. Each generation adds its experiences and wisdom and contributes to the field of knowledge.”
Chanakya 
Mr Joshi, GM rtd. Indian  bank , recalls our Indian bank experience on performance based on tps requirement. 
“Sir , for Indian Bank with your guidance we insisted to bench mark the software performance on HP machines purchased by Bank. TCS was reluctant but ultimately they did at their cost. 
You were very helpful 
Regards”
My response
Yes. While I had no doubt with the performance of the  bancs software, I had doubts about the capability of the HP server to handle the transaction load. More specifically, I wanted to check the maximum number of concurrent processes the HP server can handle. I knew IBM servers had a good concurrency design. I also knew that Sun processors used by PNB handled large concurrency.  TCS got an expert from Australia to conduct the tests. We inspected the results. In all such stress tests, we check both the queue length and concurrency management. OS needs to be specially  designed to handle lakhs of concurrent processes. 
Let me look at another example. 
PNB had core banking in about half of  its total branches.When PNB wanted to bring all its branches into core banking, they had discussions with Infosys.Infosys wasn't sure about the capacity of Finacle and its handling capability. After a strong stance by the CMD to Nandan, he agreed.  So we insisted on a stress test. It was done in England. Then we moved in to get core banking to all branches. It was a revealing situation for me. 
While Mr Chakraborty, CMD of PNB was clear that core banking means that all branches should be networked, transactions and customer data of all branches should be in a central server . He felt that the partial implementation of core banking in only some branches was not correct. But to my surprise ,I found  that most senior bankers in many banks didn't have that clarity. They were worried about customer reactions , rightly so. 
Even when it was decided to conduct the stress test , the concerned officers were worried about the details of the software, and not on the performance. 
When the RBI mandated that one can withdraw cash from any bank's ATM, the main switch couldn't handle the workload. Most transactions were rejected . Mr Sambamurthy, director of IDRBT,  called me. We discussed with the vendors and they initiated the   necessary corrective measures. 
Similarly IBMs MQ5 queue handler failed when NEFT load of usage increased. The queue size was not adequate to meet the increased demands and the queues  were overflowing. So IBM upgraded to MQ6 to solve the overflow problem. 

When a system becomes a connected one, we need to do sizing of the network also - routing capacity, bandwidth, latency etc. 
While the design process for a wide area network connecting many cities in the country is easy , LAN design needs to be done carefully looking at many parameters. I spent more than six months to design a LAN network for vidhana soudha and MS building. 
Network design is another major activity , I did for many institutions including KREC, CPRI, SJIC, BMSCE, JNNCE and many others. 
In all these , my biggest problem was educating the vendors. We conducted a full day workshop in BMS college of engineering for many engineering college faculty on designing the network. Mr Prabhu and Chowdhury of PAM networks helped me in running the workshop. 
Greetings 
Dks
02/11/24, 5:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Today is celebrated as Bali padyami in karnataka and many other states. Bali was a great and benevolent king of Asuras advised by Sukracharya. Lord Vishnu kills him , but gives him a boon to return to the world once every year. This is that day. People celebrate by rejoicing and feeding the poor. Happy Bali paduami.
Dks
03/11/24, 5:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 527

“Human beings are social animals. We are not especially big or especially strong. Our ability to survive and evolve has always
hinged on our ability to learn collectively, to adapt our ways of living to new circumstances, to innovate. We have deep instincts for kindness and concern for the other. We care about one another,
not because we need to but because we want to.
Cultivating practical capacity regarding relationships—how they work, develop, and change—requires a consensual body of knowledge. We need practices to cultivate our awareness and fluidity in action. We need shared commitment to mutual learning, based on the understanding that this matters, personally and organizationally.
In a world increasingly interconnected by technology, our abilities to understand one another and cultivate the capacity for truly thinking together become ever more critical. To the extent we fail to do so, we will become victims of a great irony, expressed succinctly by a young student recently: ‘‘We are more and more connected, and yet we are more and more separate.’’
Diana Smith   Elephants in a room 

Mr B Sambamurthy ,  CMD , corporation bank and director IDRBT, has commented on our long two decades long association.  
“You were a great help in guiding banks to implement CBS  well. Secondly, most of us at very senior level had little understanding of tech performance. You  guided even vendors to resolve the issues and not merely pointing out problems.

 Our association started with Syndicate Bank in about 2000 , then to Indian Bank, Corporation Bank, IDRBT and informally at NPCI ( 2016) . Long and very productive association.
A big thank you .”
My response
Thanks. We had a very fruitful intellectual association. I cherish our regular  long discussions . I found you to be a different banker - a thinking banker. You had an urge to improve the planning and working of institutions you were involved in. You wanted to build IDRBT into an IIT level institution and put in every effort in that direction. You converted it into a research institution and built collaborations with IIT s, NIT Warangal and university of hyderabad.  It was a very fruitful time for me to be involved with you in Indian bank, Corporation bank,  IDRBT and branchless banking as well as in whatsapp posts. Thanks for your valued friendship. 



Vinod vyasulu , my friend for close to five decades , comments on vendors' behaviours. 

“It's interesting that you say your biggest problem was educating vendors. To a very large extent, in computers, it was driven by vendors who claimed they  represented Technology and they knew what the client wanted. In small organisations, there was pressure from accountants, funders, customers to get work done on a computer. With no knowledge of software or hardware these organisations fell prey to vendors whose only goal was to make a sale.”
My response 
You are right. There are many problems with vendors.
Their knowledge level is low. They know a little bit about their product. They don’t know the capabilities, impacts, and implications. So I had to tell them and teach them. 
They are misguided. They will sell the moon , but deliver a rag. This is the most difficult problem. So as you say , most companies fall flat for the sweet words of the vendors. I needed to get to reality and that wasn't easy. That had been a tough task. You had to do data mining to get the truth.
Most vendors were not producers of a product, but sellers of a software or computers or network components. Most don't supply the original data sheet.
Most vendor representatives were neither knowledgeable about the product, nor were empowered to take spot decisions. There are some exceptions.
 My encounters with vendors for more than  six  decades is a mini mahabharata. I will discuss it in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
04/11/24, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 528
One of my major activities has been digitalisation of power utilities,  industries, governments, transport corporation, police, steel , central silk board, banks, schools, institutions, coop sector, hospitals, and even IT sector. It went on for more than 40 years of my life, not a pass time activity. My involvement spanned over 100 organizations. I had a deep commitment to this activity. It was a passion. I didn't get any income from this activity. I did this with full involvement .One of my friends, Mr Chikkappa,  our estate officer, used to say that I could have made millions in this activity, but didn't.  
This gave me immense satisfaction in life. I saw the success before my eyes - when i saw school kids in villages used computers with excitement, when i saw the production planning working in Jindal Steels, when i saw the LAN , power and elevators  working in Jayadeva hospital, vidhana soudha , power flowing without interruptions in JNCASR, IISc and a massive software development executed in the department of space or a small computer helping farmers in Gadag APMC,  core banking working in many banks and many more. That thrill was greater than money. This activity grew into a big and complex One. I consider this a very significant contribution. 
Not only I felt satisfied, but many others involved in the corresponding organizations were also satisfied. You saw the comments of Joshi and Sambamurthy. Many others have been happy with my advice. The number of senior IAS officers of karnataka who were associated with me were happy. Mr Sastry, secretary ,education ,expressed his surprise at my negotiating skills. I had a great working relationship with all the directors of KGCC. I was in touch with many afterwards also. Mr Lukose involved me in most of his IT activities in several organizations starting from land army to DG shipping. Mr SV Ranganath wanted me back in the government.  So despite a lot of misgivings from many colleagues at IISc,  I feel that I have not wasted my life. 
 I have now developed a full fledged course on transformations of technology into businesses and society.  I can run it in any institution digitally to any institution interested. I am planning to  give a series of lectures at SDM Dharwad.

Digital transformations in most companies and organizations normally  start with discussions with vendors or their representatives. Unfortunately most organizations get their technology discovery through vendors. Vendors were doing the job of  honeybees ,but delivering erroneous information sometimes . 
My involvement with hundreds of vendors is a long saga of five decades. I dealt with a variety of vendors. Initially it was components and electronics devices purchases and many used to wait for me near the department in the morning itself,  many big names like Praveen Gandhi, Hemant Sonavala, Raj Saraf, etc. Later , it was with dealers of IT, Software, network products etc. I met hundreds of vendors from HCL, Wipro, CMC, Zenith, PCS, and many other companies. During the rate contract work with the state TAP, I used to meet vendors at least once every quarter. Discussions ranged from technologies, specs, and cost. 
Later in the nineties onwards I was involved with software, ERP,  database, and networking  vendors. 
More in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
05/11/24, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 529
“The bias toward high pressure/high temperature for industrial processes steers places of manufacturing away from humans and toward large-scale, centralized factories, regardless of culture, background, or politics. The bias toward cheap ubiquitous copies in digital technologies is independent of nationality, economic momentum, or human desire, and it steers the technology toward social ubiquity; the bias is baked into the nature of digital bits. In both of these examples, we can get the most from the technologies when we “listen” to the direction the technologies lean, and bend our expectations, regulations, and products to these fundamental tendencies within that technology.”
Kevin Kelly.      Inevitable 

Mr A Srinivasan, GM, Indian bank , after Mr Joshi, comments on my role with them. 
“We feel happy to have been guided by your good self in our banks CBS right from Data Centre selection, Servers at Central DC and Network equipments and server, nodes routers at branches as well setting up is disaster site.
 It was a big relief for us when you participated in meeting with vendors in clarifying RFP terms as well finalizing prices. I remember Laser soft who used to be hard to bargain also relented in Forex software when you were present. Whether it was TCS, IBM or Oracle to name a few had great regards for your knowledge and neutrality. 
The design offered by you for Equitas Bank CBS with a Middle server and handling of all software with their APKs ended the continued exploration by software suppliers, I feel..
Overall i feel happy and proud to be associated to gain important knowledge and skills during our about a decade of association. 
With kind regards
Srinivasan A 🙏🏼🙏🏼”
Thanks Srinivasan. I cherish my association with the entire IT team of Indian bank. The ten years with the Indian bank was a very satisfying time for me. 
When I started on transformation advice and involvement in the sixties, I decided to have a set of rules on vendors to be followed by me. Let me enumerate some:
1.Treat all vendors equally. 
2.Look at branded products by stable companies.
3. The company should haexpthe necessary expertise to supply or execute the project. 
4.Dont accept whatever is told by vendors. Filter them
5.Be Open in discussions with vendors. Don’t accept a vendors comment on another . Don’t encourage it.
6. Rectify errors wherever needed. 
7.Be technical in discussions. Avoid gossip. 

Let me continue my discussions about my mini mahabharata with vendors. 
Normally vendors were well behaved. During my long discussions and negotiations with vendors, most were happy. None went for legal proceedings. 
Later, when DSERT issued a tender for purchase of computers and I wasn't in the picture, a vendor got a stay order. Then they requested me to help them. I told then to cancel the tender and return bank guarantees. Then we reinvited tender with some changes . I attended the prebid  meeting . There was a total change in the vendors behaviours.  Mr Kumar Naik , commissioner of education was surprised at the peaceful manner in which I conducted the meeting by patiently answering their questions and explaining the situation and finding alternates to their problems. 
As i said earlier, the most difficult and unruly prebid meeting , i managed was the prebid meeting for mahithisindhu program. No senior officer of education was present and i  had to handle the rough and tough. But I patiently listened to them, addressed their concerns and told them about the complexity of the project and explained to them that we needed a lot of capacity, capability to handle the many aspects of the program across the state and so it can’t be given to small companies. In the end, they left quietly. When we did the final allocation to three companies - NIIT, Aptech and Educomp- , all were happy. They worked and collaborated with each other. 

 Kindly recall an incident that happened at Bangalore dairy. They had a vendor who was maintaining  their accounting and payroll work on a monthly retainer. Then they sent a proposal to dairy asking them to buy a new computer at a high cost and also increase payment of monthly charges by almost twice. I told dairy not to accede to the request. 
In another case, Ullas Karanth  wanted a PC. A local dealer gave him a machine. When Ullas discussed with me , i said it won't work. He checked and verified with his counterpart in US. We confronted his seller. That guy was bluffing. So I took Ullas to wipro and got him a suitable machine. 
There are many such instances. We went through an era of systems analyst dominance and vendor dominance. 
Thanks , Vinod for the discussionson vendors.
Greetings
Dks
06/11/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 530
Learning 
Vidya dadati vinayam, vinaya dadati paatrataam, paatrत्वात् धनम् आप्नोति धनाद् धर्मं ततः सुखम्
"Knowledge makes one humble, humility begets worthiness, worthiness creates wealth and enrichment, enrichment leads to right conduct, and right conduct brings contentment" 
Hitopadesa

Sanjay Chitnis has this query:
“Dear Sir, Good morning! I found this interesting quote from Prof Cameron Tonkinwise: “So-called-AI is a threat to human expertise, not because it replaces human expertise, but because it undermines how we learn to become experts.”
The learning theory says you learn more when you put more effort. Will AI undermine this?”

I have a detailed response for this query. It is not simple. 
Actually , i wanted to look at learning after I discussed about  teaching . But I wanted a gap - not too many of  heavy philosophy consecutively. 
Thanks Sanjay for this opportunity for picking my mind.  
Our religion , our upanishads , our darsanas deal with this aspect quite extensively. They give indepth views of many aspects of learning. 
Sankaracharya talks about both learning and teaching. Viveka chudamani is devoted to steps required for building a person through various processes of learning. 
Most concentrate on two paths - self learning and learning from a guru. They suggested several methodologies to learn like observing, analysing, listening, cognising, clarifying , interpreting etc. 

Let me start with a query  -What do we mean by Learning?
Learning involves finding answers to primarily  three questions - what , how and why.
We are born with some techniques to learn and surrounded by  a lot of unknowns - the whole world and everything is unknown. We start with unraveling the mysteries. A child  learns how to - initially.  How to eat, walk, speak etc. Many of the answers to these ” how “ are intrinsic. A child learns to move around by trying. 
Then comes the” what “ question?
A child learns by seeing , hearing and sensing. Then it learns perceptions. It tries to compare and correlate with things seen already. It learns relationships, things in the house and later outside.  Here it is partly intrinsic and partly guided. It starts building its knowledge base slowly. 
But serious learning starts with speaking and acquiring words and their interpretations. It develops language skills. 
 AI is built with explicit techniques but a child has multiple ways of learning -observe,  identify, classify, compare, get inputs, interpret, contemplate,. These methods multiply with time. We build a whole repertoire of methods to learn throughout our living time.  we have a lot of imaginative methods, lots of implicit ways of doing and knowing. Experimenting is one such. Initially intuition plays a big role in learning - the purpose of this learning is to get a clear picture of the environment. 
We are given a curiosity to to understand an unknown. Ask what why how
We have many methods to satisfy our curiosity.
We have a connected brain that connects many unconnected occurrences. Can AI do it.
Learning gives a solution or two to our ignorance of the  unknowns.
 Let us continue further. 
Greetings
Dks
06/11/24, 7:56 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir for the detailed and yet thought provoking answer.
06/11/24, 7:58 am - Sanjay Chitnis: By the way, sir, have you decided about writing  book(s)? I can try to use AI to create a draft from your posts.
06/11/24, 8:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Welcome. I am planning a series of lectures on technology  transformations for business , governance and society.
07/11/24, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 531
“What separates Masters from others is often something surprisingly simple. Whenever we learn a skill, we frequently reach a point of frustration—what we are learning seems beyond our capabilities. Giving in to these feelings, we unconsciously quit on ourselves before we actually give up.The difference is not simply a matter of determination, but more of trust and faith. Many of those who succeed in life have had the experience in their youth of having mastered some skill—a sport or game, a musical instrument, a foreign language, and so on. Buried in their minds is the sensation of overcoming their frustrations and entering the cycle of accelerated returns. In moments of doubt in the present, the memory of the past experience rises to the surface. Filled with trust in the process, they trudge on well past the point at which others slow down or mentally quit.”
Greene.       Mastery

A child follows learning with unlearning . It gets an idea , later it revises, and may retrace from that idea. The way a child learns is that it uses perceptions and develops identification methods first, followed by grouping and classification. Then it learns the truth and falsity slowly. But it doesn't follow logic or mathematics or sciences. It identifies shapes in a different way. I saw children at age three identifying makes or models of cars by just looking at their shape ,at a time they can’t read. There is a different conceptual mechanism based probably on visuals  working there. 
Then it starts questioning everything it encouters. That is its period of learning and unlearning.  This builds a child's beliefs system. 
Later when a child goes to school, our formalised education system destroys all these intuitive learning methods and indoctrinates children with our formal structures . We dump heuristics, intuition , imagination,  intrinsic activities, and  observations into a dust bin. Our God is the formal STEM system. It destroys curiosity and discussions based learning. It doesn’t have provisions for internal learning, experimentation. Analysis is also  restricted. 
Problem solving taught in our system is rigid. It accepts only numeric data and expects  a single correct  solution mostly. It simplifies a problem. It is not realistic. 
I have a lingering doubt hanging within  me for many years - 
Do we ,in the name of formalism and scientific approach, 
1.ignore the innate learning strengths of a person?
2.move away from natural humanistic way of problem understanding, and solving through simplified and formal methods?
3.create an artificiality - rural kids have no idea of many aspects urban kids use.
4.ignore human sciences almost totally and concentrate on science and mathematics ?
5. Ignore learning and focus on examinations oriented system, thereby creating nervousness, tension and declaring 50% of students as failures, and about 80% to drop out of schools?
6. Ignore many arts like painting, music , sculpture etc almost completely?
7.accept the fact that teachers believe in fixed biases and beliefs and can't be changed?
8. Accept the reality that learning and education are determined by the market - say jobs , glamor like IITs?
9. Why do we ignore our centuries old  gurukula system's  good points ? Why do we hate It?

We went through many reforms. We did introduce the credit system , continuous evaluation and electives. It did provide a marginal relief, but didn't take us forward. 
NEP didn't address the fundamentals but went for a practical approach. It had a positive direction , but couldn't go far. We only discuss two language vs three language policies, a peripheral thinking. 
My next question
Why should education have to be uniform, rigid and old, 
as well as not localised, not environment , human and society sensitive, and not relevant to many ?. 
Answers to these questions are not easy and simple. They need to evolve starting with a big mindset change in people, educators and politicians. We need to start with a goal of humanism and harmony , not just jobs. 
The current open social networks based system should raise it's voice on the need for a flexible, balanced, relevant , modern , realistic, multi dimensional and partly localised educational system . 
All these questions were bugging me for several decades of teaching, but I did my job to the satisfaction and expectations of the society but not to the satisfaction of my inner self. 
In a sense,  I was satisfied that I did something useful to society , organizations and people. I had the urge to do more to make it more meaningful. That was my reason to use the whatsapp approach to discuss education and later  to write and whatsapp more than 500 posts on Hinduism for the past five years. 
Let us continue on this in the next post
Greetings
Dks
08/11/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 532
Technological life in the future will be a series of endless upgrades. And the rate of graduations is accelerating. Features shift, defaults disappear, menus morph. I’ll open up a software package I don’t use every day expecting certain choices, and whole menus will have disappeared.
No matter how long you have been using a tool, endless upgrades make you into a newbie—the new user often seen as clueless. In this era of “becoming,” everyone becomes a newbie. Worse, we will be newbies forever. That should keep us humble.
That bears repeating. All of us—every one of us—will be endless newbies in the future simply trying to keep up. Here’s why: First, most of the important technologies that will dominate life 30 years from now have not yet been invented, so naturally you’ll be a newbie to them. Second, because the new technology requires endless upgrades, you will remain in the newbie state. Third, because the cycle of obsolescence is accelerating (the average lifespan of a phone app is a mere 30 days!), you won’t have time to master anything before it is displaced, so you will remain in the newbie mode forever. Endless Newbie is the new default for everyone, no matter your age or experience.
Kevin Kelly.         Inevitable 

Let me discuss what  Sankaracharya says about the ten  qualities for a student.
He introduced the practice of Sādhana catuṣṭya, the four preliminary qualifications as a means to attain knowledge. They are Vairāgya (detachment), Viveka (discrimination), Śamādiṣaṭsampatti (six treasures such as control of mind and the like) and Mumukṣutva (yearning for liberation from the bondage of ignorance). They are discussed in his work Aparokşānubhūti (AP).
The satsampatti are 
1.Śama: It means control and one-pointedness (concentration) of mind so that it becomes calm and steady.
2.Dama: It means control of sense organs.
3.Titikṣā: It means endurance of all types of suffering.
4.Uparati: It means renunciation of all karmas or turning away from all sense objects. Avoid distractions. 
5.Śraddhā: It is faith in the teachings of the Vedas and the teacher.
6.Samādhāna: One pointedness or concentration of mind on the Brahman is called as Samādhāna. It can be viewed as focussing and deep studies.
Sankaracharya defines the process of learning as
 Śravaṇa, Manana, and Nididhyāsana. Śravaṇa means to listen and study based on concepts and  principles. 
. Manana means reflecting on the teachings of the right teacher. 
Nididhyāsana means a continuous flow of similar mental states, united with self; like that of the continuous stream of oil. Most loose interest after some time. Can we go on for hours studying  a topic?
The depth Sankaracharya talks about is different from what Calport says about deep learning. Calport says that our concept of teaching a topic for One hour at a time is not correct. Concentrate and study one topic for a few days  , instead of intermittent learning. I learnt programming in a few days in the sixties. I wrote a large  program within a week. If I had attended a semester-long course, I might have lost interest and might not be in the computer field at all. So I saw the benefit of intense and deep learning. 
I saw the effect of concentration , depth and intensity of learning in my grandson at an early age of three or four. His intensity and concentration were and are phenomenal.  It is desirable to build these qualities in our children. 
Western educationists have the opposite ideas. They assume that children lose interest quickly and hence the psychologists  don't ask the question “ Are there methods for a child to practice so as  to increase the concentration for hours continuously?”
Our early gurukula system was based on the premise that children can be taught concentration, contemplation and intensity . The gurus start with that aspect in the beginning itself  by making students to recite vedas continuously. The practice of reciting vedas was normally done for several hours in a day. Music is learnt by practicing for several hours every day. This practice is called sadhana in carnatic music and riaz in Hindustani.  The great musician, Hariharan,  says that riaz , the practice of singing for hours is a daily  routine for him like eating , bathing , sleeping etc. We need to build this as a habit  in our children . A lot of learning is internal , churning ideas and thoughts in mind. 
I daily do a practice - churning ideas in my mind, particularly in the night on a topic that is bugging me at that instant. I get into an imaginative world without rationalism, logic or analytic approaches. You do get answers sometimes after many days of imaginations. 
Recall the panchatantra stories. What did that achieve - converted a few useless - the perception of the father- persons into worldly wise people. Does it not ring a bell on learning methods? 
Remember if we don’t learn and practice this intensity, Gen AI, in its present state, will beat us. So that mental attitude and the consequent development of intensity is crucial for us to survive. That is a warning signal.
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
09/11/24, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 533
Let us continue with Sankaracharya teachings.
He emphasizes the need to select a proper guru. He gives a list  of qualities to look for in a guru. 

1.Guide by asking questions: The best way to guide a student is to ask questions that encourage dialogue, so that the student can discover the answer. 
 2.Be a role model: A guru should be a protector like a father, a giver of new birth like a mother, and a friend who makes disciples comfortable. 
 3.Be knowledgeable: A guru should be versed in the Śruti texts (Vedas, Upanishads) and established in that knowledge. 
 4.Be humble: A guru should impress upon the student qualities like humility, which are the means to knowledge. 
 5.Be compassionate: A guru should be compassionate and have a desire to help others. 
 6 Be unattached: A guru should be unattached to pleasures here and hereafter. 
 7.Be a good role model: A guru should be a good role model and never transgress the rules of conduct. 
Next let me look at the question - why do we learn?

Objectives of learning - many 
To get skills to get a livelihood
To be a human with good qualities
To be accepted by family and society
To be creative - artists 
To be successful in life
To learn  principles of life and living
To get happiness - ananda
To get bliss , calmness and peace - stithaprajna
To know the real me - atman.

Let me look at the first part of Sanjay's comment .
“Prof Cameron Tonkinwise: “So-called-AI is a threat to human expertise, not because it replaces human expertise, but because it undermines how we learn to become experts.”


So becoming an expert is only one aspect of learning one objective.
I agree there will be a great change in what we learn and what we do? AI will bring this change. 
Knowledge acquisition will be AIs role and AI becomes our expert - almost everyone's expert and advisor and helper. You will be dependent on AI for many things and actions in life. It can dominate you. 

Experts were good in a static domain. But today changes are happening fast. We live in a dynamic, complex , interconnected world. They say that changes were happening in a slow and linear fashion in the 19th and 20th century, but now in the 21st century  changes are happening at a fast and exponential pace and many changes are happening simultaneously.  So life is going in a fast lane. We may find Freud outdated, find new and previously not  encountered situations. Experience and knowledge , characteristics of an expert, doesn't help here. Most experts will be left out and many instant experts are emerging today. 
I see many youngsters today . They just pickup a few jargon and a skillset and claim expertise in AI. I had an encounter with a youngster. He did java programming work for a year and came to me and  told me that he has learnt everything about java . I asked a few questions about applet and servlet . He didn't know those terms. Most java programmers don't design systems but only write some code  to modify a module or function. They are front soldiers but claim to be experts. I don't worry about them, but about genuine experts with great knowledge and experience. 
But AI at least will be a lot more knowledgeable than an expert. It has a lot of books and experiences and a very huge computing power at its command.  We are no match to it.So I agree that the concept of an expert as we know now and the concept of specialisation will either change or go away.
Let me recall a story about expertise. 
A transformer failed. Leibnitz analysed the failure and said that it is an interturn fault and told which point or location the fault occurred. He used mathematical modeling for the first time. So an expert tomorrow should be an innovator , finding new solutions. That will be a challenge. 
Today there is a serious problem with an expert. We need to be aware of it and go for corrections. I am hoping a new breed of young experts will emerge for new areas and problems like astro sciences, bio sciences, philosophy, subatomic physics and consciousness. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
09/11/24, 4:15 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, I am happy to share that I will be taking over as the Vice Chancellor of REVA University in December.  I have learnt a lot(and continue to learn) from you and I will continue to seek your guidance and support to make a contribution to our society and nation through education. Warm regards...
09/11/24, 6:13 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Congrats. All the best. Dks
09/11/24, 6:16 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir!!
10/11/24, 5:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 534
In his essay “The Culture of Liberty,” Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa notes that people who live in the same place, speak the same language, and practice the same religion obviously have much in common. But he points out that these collective traits do not fully define each individual. Seeing people only as members of groups is, he says, “inherently reductionist and dehumanizing, a collectivist and ideological abstraction of all that is original and creative in the human being, of all that has not been imposed by inheritance, geography, or social pressure.” Real, personal identity, he argues, “springs from the capacity of human beings to resist these influences and counter them with free acts of their own invention.”
Nikolas Christakis        Blueprint 

Prof Chanakya in his response to my post 532,  elaborates on my observation of imaginations running wild. 
“Churning ideas in the mind at night (without the urgency of the next task) in an imaginative world without restrictive rationalism and more importantly without being circumscribed by our formal training often fetches me a lot simpler and more generic solutions, although not guaranteed to work all the time.  

I guess, more often even in this state we are unconsciously circumscribed by our formal training and only occasionally we permit ourselves to break through its shackles.  As you rightly put it, the rigidity of our structured logic is too strong to break.  And when we do it consciously in a creative field, creating a new musical tune or a piece of sculpture, we are often happy and jubilant (I am aware both music and art are also strongly structured).

So Prof DKS, is it that the artists have greater freedom (or lesser risk) to break out of their structured thinking than among people of our kind of training.  

Hopefully I am not mixing apples and oranges.”
My response 
Thanks Chanakya . I was sure that statement may be lost in the wood. You highlighted it. 
Unfortunately, our learning and education are highly biased and highly constrained. We hear ‘no’ everywhere . Even the formal education constrains you a lot. 
What is the biggest effect of this learning - freedom is lost. I feel that there are no free thinkers in the educated community. 
I felt , as you agree that the escape route was to move into a free imagined world. It benefitted me a lot.
Science operates on a binary world, a single unified view is correct  ,other views are false. . Artists operate on a gray world with more than 256 cells. Their canvas is huge. Scientists' canvas is puny . The views of artists is the entire universe, and that of the educated is a small domain. We need to learn from musicians, painters and sculptors. Yogiraj worked with  pure imagination to sculpt the bala rama installed in Ayodhya. This means that their views are not only broad , but also focussed to very small details. 

You are correct that a good artist breaks from conventions and learnings, wanders freely, imagines and creates his art. Why not we see these effects? Why do academics think that science and rational thinking are the ultimate? Why are they myopic in views and visions? Why can't they experiment?
 Einstein admitted that he learnt from his violin and with his imaginations. Great researchers and innovators have that capability. Steeve Jobs had a totally opposite view to the prevailing worldviews. He built MAC computer in a totally different way than a PC. I could use it easily within 10 minutes of switching on. I struggled for days with MSDOS. See the difference between a mountain and a mouse.  But he broke all conventions to build an Ipod . It was so cute and beautiful. It wasn't  simple to use, but won millions of users. It destroyed Sony's Walkman. 
So there are exceptions. How do open the minds of the educated to these facts, is a big question. But experimentation by some like the Valley school in Bangalore was not appreciated and encouraged. 
I have two totally opposite  streams of thinking- one is the imaginative general Problem solving ideas and concepts, another is a focussed one - planning in mind for a paper to be written or my lecture next day.  That thinking was within boundaries and constraints. 
Sometimes I plan in detail a talk and deliver the talk with a totally different aspect. It happened to me several times particularly when I gave lectures on Bangalore water supply or electrical systems design  or planning. 
Thanks , Chanakya.
Greetings
Dks
11/11/24, 3:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 535


Let me look at your concern, Sanjay, now.
First , I don't fully subscribe to the view that 
“The learning theory says you learn more when you put more effort. Will AI undermine this?”

 It is looking at one aspect only - educational learning. Even there, it doesn't reveal the full picture. 
I have seen some people put much less effort and learn more than some others who put in seversl magnitudes more effort but understand less. 
Let me define the functional dependencies of learning according to my understanding.  
Learning depends on:
1.Effort and approaches or methodologies
2.Observations
3.Attention 
4.Reception
5.Retention
6.Repetition
7.Classification 
8.Concentration
9.Contemplation 
10. Clarity
11.discrimination 


While I partially agree that you put effort into learning. But ask yourself - what effort and how?
Effort is not just physical but mental. Effort is also multidimensional and highly interconnected leading to understanding a complex , uncertain system . You need to observe, perceive, compare,analyse logically and spiritually, contemplate , look through multiple views before you understand. So you go through several steps. AI is a tool and will help you in many of your efforts. My guess is that with AI, your efforts will increase and not decrease. You may go away from knowns to unknowns. You need to improve your consciousness as we have been doing all along from millions of years, definitely after Rig Vedic times.

The reality is 
We are still frogs in the well, maybe a bigger one.  We are confused, we have wrong and erroneous ideas and beliefs. We carry a baggage through learning. So it becomes essential to unlearn.
While learning has become a tuned and mentally subconscious plus conscious activity, unlearning needs a lot of conscious and thinking efforts.
Our knowledge is very limited, biased and erroneous . We have delusions that science is taking us forward. It looks like science is correcting its mistakes and understandings through new theories and axioms. Science still focuses on matter, not much on waves. Most learnings are discrete like electricity, light, heat etc. We are still not clear what is this gravity ?We don’t understand - what the effects of waves are on us. We don’t know the answer to a simple question - who am I?
Humans learn only a bit of the world, a bit of humanism, a skillset etc. They don't  mostly learn to learn . Upanishads use questions, arguments, discussions, precise definitions, analogies etc  to look at a topic, analyse it , look in all views  and options, and arrive at many solutions. It leads towards holistic approaches to learning. 

Learning can be classified as
1.self induced , self promoted learning
2.learning through meditation, concentration, contemplation , single minded devotion 
2.learning by push by others- it is only partial learning. You know what you see or hear. You may not analyse it. You may get highly biased knowledge- that is our tragedy today. You may get wrong or erroneous or fake knowledge as it is happening today. AI can help us in this - it collects knowledge from everywhere and puts it together, it quantifies the occurrences,  it alerts on fakes, . But AI is also incomplete and biased. AI doesn't make you a better thinker, better human, etc. It may even make you accept evil and destroy the world. 
3.conscious or subconscious learning
4.directed or focused or goal based learning. 
5.learning to achieve greater cognition 
6.learning to open yourself to unknowns
7.learning aided by tools 
8.learning with AI- AI can help you, assist you or push you to go beyond barriers into the unknowns.  Upanishads have emphasized on learning beyond knowns. Western science talks of learning the knowns. So there is a lot of difference . 

AI can be a good assistant for us to learn and unlearn. Use AI as a guide , not as a guru or master. AI can analyse a large volume of facts and create multiple views so that you decide correctly. AI can analyse a large volume of numerical data and give you predictions with probabilities. Now it is upto your intelligence to interpret these predictions . 
Remember when steam locomotives came and travel became faster, we weren't scared. When cranes lifted tonnes , we were happy. In all such cases , we defined safety norms, operations training, and a lot of dos and don'ts.  You don't touch a bare electrical wire because you know the effect. AI will have much greater impacts - both physical and virtual.  
Can we define a similar but larger  set of dos and don'ts for work , personal and societal  applications executed by AI? There in lies our focus .
Thanks Sanjay.
Greetings 
Dks
11/11/24, 6:00 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Thanks a lot for the very detailed response!! I need to read this multiple times and think to really understand and absorb it. I will get back with further questions.
12/11/24, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  536
“Sandalwood does not give up its fragrance even if broken, the elephant does not give up sex even if old, sugarcane does not give up its sweetness even when thrown into the crushing machine. Great ones do not give up their good qualities even when they are weakened.”
Chanakya 
I said that learning depends on the 11 factors in my last post. Mr Srinivasan, ex GM, PNB asked how the same lecture reaches many differently like water falling on a hot plate- evaporating and water falling on a lotus leaf. This needs clarity. 
What do I mean here by learning? 
It means the  absorption and understanding of knowledge and its multiple avatars.  
Absorption levels and rate vary with people and their capabilities.  Absorption also varies with the extent of our involvement in the 11 factors. 
There are some who grasp a point told once and retain it in memory. 
There are some who needs to be told several times to grasp a point. 
There are some who need no explanation to understand a point. 
There are some who need a very detailed explanation to grasp a point. 
Similarly the level of cognition also varies from person to person. 
There are some who can correct their teachers . 
So learning is to be viewed in many dimensions. 
Absorption level
absorption rate
Effort to absorb 
Range of knowledge etc.
Learning depends on the premises , beliefs and axioms . You read science based on matter and its properties. Another may go from waves and frequency basis. A third will study based on relations between entities. These depend on teaching methodology. We have put constraints everywhere with our formal system killing curiosity and individual capabilities. 
There is no one path and no 
‘One size fits all ‘ philosophy. You can reach Delhi from Bangalore via the moon. Satellite communication equalized distances between any two locations. 
Learning is a complex science like Adisesha with 1000 heads with each head teaching to a separate student. Can we understand how one teaches 1000 separate topics to 1000 people? Learning also has mysteries like that. 
We are yet to know how one learns by meditation or contemplation? 
So many doubts with no clear answers.
Greetings 
Dks
13/11/24, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 537
“IMAGINE AN ALTERNATE universe in which people don’t have words for different forms of transportation—only the collective noun “vehicle.” They use that word to refer to cars, buses, bikes, spacecraft, and all other ways of getting from place A to place B. Conversations in this world are confusing. 
Fraudsters have capitalized on the fact that consumers don’t know what to believe when it comes to vehicle technology, so scams are rampant in the vehicle sector. 
Now replace the word “vehicle” with “artificial intelligence,” and we have a pretty good description of the world we live in.
Artificial intelligence, AI for short, is an umbrella term for a set of loosely related technologies. ChatGPT has little in common with, say, software that banks use to evaluate loan applicants. Both are referred to as AI, but in all the ways that mat ter—how they work, what they’re used for and by whom, and how they fail—they couldn’t be more different.”
Aravind Narayanan and Sayash Kapur.
 AI  snake oil
Mr Joshi has some comments. Let me look at them in sequence. 
Comment 1
“Will AI provide purpose of existence?”
My response 
Already we have got AI personal assistant available . It uses gen AI which means it uses both image recognition and language recognition  techniques. The LLM is becoming quite good.GenAI has a very huge database available to It and so it will provide many opinions.  Definitely AI will provide better inputs on purpose of life and existence. It will be much better than what many ordinary people will realise. 
A properly designed AI can move us away from materialism and move us towards respect  to nature and society. It can constantly educate and remind people and also provide directions. 
If we build LLMs based on Indian languages , it will scan all literature in Sanskrit and Indian languages and can feed us lots of upanishadic thoughts in understandable form.  
Whether someone follows the directions given by AI,  It is up to him or her. But I feel that  a good number will listen to the output coming from genAI. In this respect, I am positive about the role of AI. 
Another interesting development happening in the field of AI is the creation of a large emotions model. An integration with LLMs and statistics will take AI to become a human friendly  tool. AI will mimic good behaviours . If it is coupled with health data tracked by watches , it can alert people about impending problems due to over emotions. With good sensors , it will alert one about an impending heart problem . 
These are major advantages of AI. 
One of the silver lining in AI research today leads  to many new advantages : 
AI is multidisciplinary. There are researchers belonging to many disciplines - computer science, logic, image processing, pattern recognition, speech processing, languages, psychology, neural sciences, cognition, philosophy, medicine, education , statistics etc. So we get a good variety of outputs , quite a lot of  them  will be useful.
AI has applications in all sectors from education, health, agriculture, governance, human sciences, cognition, urban studies, cyber physical systems , astronomy , fintech etc. The thousands of startups will get us good products.
AI has provided a totally new way of thinking. Most scientific theories were binary. Mathematics provided mostly one solution or approach to a problem. Engineering accepted one solution as valid and rejected others. AI has created a brand new way to solve problems by using several disciplines like statistics, neural networks, cognition, knowledge representation, pattern recognition , language models, heuristics , soft computing and emotional models. It unifies and processes millions to billions of data through multiple pipelines and comes up with many solutions. This opens many new areas for research. 
AI is innovation intense activity. It combines with high speed computing, big data , IOT and sensors and GPUs to provide solutions, no guess work, no approximations, no limited amount of data etc. 

Let me look at his other comments in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
14/11/24, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 538
His second comment:
“We need to develop pure Technological philosophy, social structure and suitable  applied political , judicial and economic to survive in AI world.  Otherwise Technology will have quantum jumps and humans will be left behind with only two castes . AI friendly and remaining . 
My view 
Regards”
My response
I agree that understanding technology in a philosophical way is important. 
We need to realise that technology has many variations. It can be simple or complex, easy to use or difficult to use, accessible or difficult to access etc. 
Secondly, technology can't be directly used . It needs to be configured , modified and built into a usable form through many other components. 
So technology absorption is not an easy process. It depends on many factors, it is context sensitive, learning sensitive. 
The biggest problems in technology adoption are  the fear of technology, confused understanding  and losing one's comfort zone in the workplace. So this led to a lot of opposition to the introduction of computers for more than 30 years by labour unions, politicians from Indira Gandhi to George Fernandez ,  from bank employees to officers , from the anti computer policies of the government and even from economists. That was a great tragedy. 

It is difficult to understand its use in our day to day activities. Let me look at an example - electricity. 
 It took more than 100 years to develop electrical technology. Even Edison's devices could not be put to use. It took Tesla to come up with the theory of  alternating current and put together a water turbine with a generator to generate electricity at Niagara in 1885, about 200 years after electricity was discovered. Then Tesla needed to build a transmission line to take that electricity to New York for use. So it went through several stages. That was the time in those days to build engineering systems with technologies. Then it was time to discover devices like lamps, Water heaters, refrigerators, fans, motors etc. So it was a slow process.
 We,  in India, got our first  power station in 1906 at shivasamudram and bangalore got street lighting in 1907 . IISc started electrical engineering in 1909. But it took more than  60 to 70 years for electric power to reach the city people. 
So technology is always far ahead of normal humans. 
Take computers. I started using computers in 1965. Education saw its use only in 1980 or 90 onwards . Common man had to wait till 2010 to know about it. 
So I don't think we should worry that technology is ahead of us. It is a natural order. Developers think far ahead of their time. So I don't think it is a matter of concern. 
We are a highly adaptive and fast learning species. All of us can not be classified as a single group. Based on our intelligence, intuition, emotion, character, dynamism, habits, beliefs, behaviours etc, we can be classified into hundreds of groups as varaha upanishad says. 
There are always a small group of people with a great urge to innovate. This number has increased manifold in recent decades. So I am confident, a series of solutions and appropriate life styles will emerge with AI,  as it has happened with digital transformation.  We will experiment, learn, innovate, modify , unlearn, relearn , conquer fear , build confidence and adapt AI to our needs and we adapt ourselves to include AI in our life. 
Continued  in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
15/11/24, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 539
Let me continue further.
I feel that  the invention of AI is not a one day activity. It took us more than half a century to develop bits and pieces of AI and may take another half century or less to take it to higher levels.
Remember that AI is built on top of many technologies. 
Let us ask- Given the attitudes about technology adoption—from both technology and business professionals—what emerging/disruptive technologies are in play? 
The winners in 21st century  include cloud computing, big data analytics, e-Learning, BYOD, mobile computing, wearables, location-based technologies, Internet-of-Things (IoT), blockchain, GPUs , e-Payment systems and digital security technologies, especially multi level authentication. We moved centralised approach to both centralised and decentralised approach. We shifted from industry 4.0 to society 5.0, a people first approach. SRS- specifications first-  died. 

AI is built using large cloud, huge data sources ,terahertz  GPUs and several models and frameworks. 
 Along with these developments , we are also improving our consciousness. 
We always had two opposite  castes -powerful and powerless or master and slave,  poor and rich, literate and illiterate, digital novice and digital native etc. So we will have AI friendly and AI averse people also. 
Remember that you don't know a lot about electricity to use it at home. Similarly AI will guide the AI  ignorant millions of people. I see people wearing smart watches and checking their health parameters daily without any knowledge of smart wearables. It gets simpler to use. 

 AI is getting embedded in many devices. Users may not even know it is there. 
There are 200 use cases of Microsoft copilot. 
Some examples
Adobe is connecting Adobe Experience Cloud workflows and insights with Microsoft 365 Copilot to deliver generative-AI powered capabilities that enable marketers to increase collaboration, efficiency and creativity.
City of Madrid created an AI virtual assistant with Microsoft Azure OpenAI Service, offering tourists accurate, real-time information and personalized responses in 95-plus languages.
AXA developed AXA Secure GPT, a platform powered by Azure OpenAI Service that empowers employees to leverage the power of generative AI while targeting the highest level of data safety and responsible use of the tool.
Finastra used Microsoft 365 Copilot to automate tasks, enhance content creation, improve analytics and personalize customer interactions, with employees citing a 20% to 50% time savings.
Goodwill of Orange County developed an AI-powered app using Azure AI capabilities to help more people, including those with developmental, intellectual and physical disabilities, work in unfilled e-commerce positions.
Bradesco Bank integrated Microsoft Azure into its virtual assistant, BIA, resulting in reduced response time from days to hours, improving operational efficiency and client satisfaction.
Dubai Electricity and Water Authority has significantly improved productivity and customer satisfaction by integrating multiple Microsoft AI solutions, reducing task completion time from days to hours and achieving a 98% customer happiness rate.
First National Bank (FNB) is using Microsoft Copilot for Sales to help bankers create professional, thoughtful emails in 13 native South African languages, to enhance customer interactions, streamline communications and reinforce its commitment to innovation and customer service.
International University of Applied Sciences (IU) adopted Azure OpenAI Service to revolutionize learning with a personalized study assistant that can interact with each student just like a human would.
South Australia Department for Education launched an AI-powered educational chatbot to help safeguard students from harmful content while introducing responsible AI to the classrooms.
A major  Indian use mentioned is:
Air India has incorporated Microsoft 365 Copilot into multiple departments, unlocking a new realm of operational insights that not only provide critical data on flight punctuality and operational hurdles but also empower proactive, collaborative decision making.

When you see these useful applications happening in other countries in hundreds to thousands, i am worried. 
We missed digital revolution by decades. Even now our utilities, our construction , agriculture , health , government sectors live outside the digital eco system. There are statements that India is ahead in AI.
So when will we build  many relevant,  India centric AI eco systems? 
We have chatbots and Alexa .
Government is keen on AI, some  efforts are going on , but we need lots of  efforts, thinking, research and structures  to create AI assisted agriculture for each individual farmer, AI assisted learning system for each student and person, AI doctor for all, AI managed power , water, gas and transport utilities, AI managed urban real time governance and many more. Will AI prevent corruption and stop environmental degradation by greedy people?
Let us forget fear and concentrate on these missions. We need a shared vision to build a new India, not a show case India. 
Just as AI needed other technology developments, its applications needed more tools. One of them is CUDA, used by many AI applications developers. 
CUDA (Compute Unified Device Architecture) is a platform and programming model that allows developers to use GPUs (graphics processing units) for general-purpose processing.
 CUDA allows developers to speed up applications by using GPUs to perform compute-intensive tasks in parallel. This is called general-purpose computing on GPUs (GPGPU). 
Greetings
Dks
16/11/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 540
Let me go to Mr Joshi's  third comment:
“Agree.  But how to bring in these skills to ordinary learners. How can AI help this ? 
Regards”
My response
AI will be a boon to create equality in literacy. Even the concept of literacy will  change.  Also the concept of expert and expertise as well as the concept of education all will change or are changing
AI will have an influence in every function, task , activity and sector that we are involved with. Most devices will have multiple embeddings of multiple AI advice and support. Many devices will go towards both edge computing and the 5G ways.  
We need to think differently and set up Kirana schools at every nook and corner in the country to facilitate the use of AI facilities. The store will be run by AI. Who owns it? Ownership concept will change. Please be prepared for these changes. 
With almost the entire content in the world at its fingertips and good statistical capabilities , AI will evolve into a good individually tuned and individual based teacher. That will be a major revolution,  if research is focused in that direction instead of the current trivial chasing of commercial gains. 
Many don't use paper and pen today. Many forgot simple arithmetic and use calculators. So many may even forget reading and writing. 
Most education and AI researchers look at the delivery mechanism, and content management. We need to go further and apply many operations on contents and come up with meaningful answers. 

As I said earlier , today's research is multi disciplinary and multi directional. Semantic web and AI will lead us there. All these research activities will make AI a great teacher to everyone. 
We should be careful to know and direct the “what to teach”  aspect. Skills are easy. But do we predict how AI will affect our behaviours , our habits and mindset ?  We need to use our intrinsic capabilities to forsee these impacts. 
AI ethicists can help organizations with regulatory compliance and risk mitigation when deploying AI. But smart companies can also leverage these specialists to drive ethical innovation across the organization.
diverse group of employees collaborating at table with laptops.

In response to the many ethical concerns surrounding the rise of generative artificial intelligence (genAI), including privacy, bias, and misinformation, many technology companies have started to work with AI ethicists, either on staff or as consultants. These professionals are brought on to steward how the organization adopts AI into their products, services, and workflows.
An AI ethicist is a highly collaborative position, one that should have influence horizontally across the organization.
One of the key responsibilities of ethicists is communication, particularly around governance.
Governance means that organizations need to have enough understanding of the technology that they really can control the risks, mitigate, and deal with them. It means that artificial intelligence as a concept needs to be well communicated through the organization so people understand what its limits are so it can be used responsibly,”
Most organizations have an AI ethics person. But he or she is considered a nuisance,  not an important person  . Recall that an AI ethicist was fired by a big and great company a couple of years before. We need a code of conduct for all. Teach AI ethics in schools. 
Santana dharma says that good and evil is there in us. Each of us has some daivatva and some rakshasatva . It says that when daivatva is more ,we have peace and prosperity. When rakshasatva is more we have war and poverty and death. We need to live in a society or a place where daivatva is dominant. Live where AI is directed towards  useful and harmonious and good paths. 
Thanks
Greetings 
Dks
16/11/24, 5:48 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, As always, your writing shows your deep understanding of the subject and gives us good clarity. I never thought people may forget reading and writing! But definitely, it makes sense. Thanks a ton!
17/11/24, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 541
“In sustaining circumstances—when the race entails making better products that can be sold for more money to attractive customers—we found that incumbents almost always prevail. In disruptive circumstances—when the challenge is to commercialize a simpler, more convenient product that sells for less money and appeals to a new or unattractive customer set—the entrants are likely to beat the incumbents.”
Christensen. Innovators solutions 

There is a comment from Dr Sanjay Chitnis:
“Dear Sir, As always, your writing shows your deep understanding of the subject and gives us good clarity. I never thought people may forget reading and writing! But definitely, it makes sense. Thanks a ton!”

My clarification on reading and writing. 
While the normal trivial reading of messages may continue, serious reading will disappear. I see that it is already disappearing. 
Let me talk about my encounter a few years back. I was asked to talk to  all 170 assistant professors individually in a college by the management in order to motivate them.  I spent a week doing this. I found that no one read any book,  forget about the habit of reading journals. Sire, there was no motivation to teach. One had the arrogance to say that research is unnecessary .  It is a matter of serious concern.
 While schools in the west make reading books as a regular and conscious practice with regular reading sessions, we happily ignore that mode of reading, understanding, contemplating , interpreting and creating interests and curiosity. We are exam oriented. 
Most people in India stop reading once they get a job. Aren't we converting thinking people into vegetables? When asked, most reply that they love books and want to read, but have no time, a standard excuse. 
It reminds me of Mr FC Kohli, the founder head of TCS. He used to read IEEE journals in the afternoon.  He used to say ,” make time for reading. Allocate an hour or two to read daily “ . A friend of mine expressed surprise that it read a lot of books, a habit in cultivated from childhood. I didn't have any target, but read a lot and a big variety of books, not just fiction. I enjoy reading. I am happy that my children and grandsons  picked up this habit at a young age. 
Why not parents focus on cultivating serious reading habits in their children from a young age instead of worrying about IIT admissions. 
Similarly, writing has been disappearing.
WhatsApp allowed shorthand notations. People save words a lot and have a stock set of words like cool, nice, awesome, good , etc. 
Now whatsapp has graduated us to a moronic state with emojis.  
With genAI writing poetry , fiction , lecture notes, and a lot more, many professions will see a great impact on several aspects,  my concern being the impact on reading and writing. 
So both reading and writing are loosing their place in our learning  reductions  , this will reduce scholarship - scholars are not built by formal education alone- . That is not desirable. We need corrective steps. 
Greetings
Dks
17/11/24, 6:01 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Yes, Sir, thanks for clarifying. Today's generation has already lost the skill of writing (which indicates clarity of thinking before starting to write). Our libraries in colleges have a lot of good books. But very few people read them.
18/11/24, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 542
Rajani, my cousin ,comments on future gazing. 
“Anna your vision is amazing. Clarity analysis imagining and anticipating future technological developments •••• too good😊”

My response
Today, no business or activity will survive without a bit of future gazing for at least 10 to 15 years ahead.
Upanishads ask us to look for unknowns. 
Don't be a frog in the well - with inward looking attitude. Know the world, thy world's developments and movements . Try to understand how it will go and how it will help us and how we should adjust to the changes. 
Ask AI assistants or agents. Tsunamis will be created by AI. I am sure just like last decade children picked up goggling,  this decade children will start living with GPT or Gemini or meta or copilot. 
Thanks for your keen interest in future gazing, not through astrology but through AI.
Greetings
Dks
19/11/24, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 543
“The reason why we take such pains to imagine unpleasant events is that fear, worry, and anxiety have useful roles to play in our lives. We motivate employees, children, spouses, and pets to do the right thing by dramatizing the unpleasant consequences of their misbehaviors, and so too do we motivate ourselves by imagining the unpleasant tomorrows that await us should we decide to go light on the sunscreen and heavy on the éclairs. Forecasts can be “fearcasts” whose purpose is not to predict the future so much as to preclude it, and studies have shown that this strategy is often an effective way to motivate people to engage in prudent, prophylactic behavior.”
Daniel Gilbert.  “stumbling on happiness”
Prof P Raja comments on the kirana stores idea:
“Due to the burst of AI everywhere,How and when the present conventional educational system will reoriented? Kirana concept In schooling is a. welcoming move in our present structure to educate the people in a more faster way with facilitator than a teacher. A new model need to be evolved to influence and benefit out of  the AI.”
My response 
We need to experiment with AI education, the focus to be on more on its use as an assistant to people to help them in knowing about what is happening in the world, in their field and in providing them with good data sets to make decisions. One major worry for parents is to provide good education to their children. AI can supply useful and relevant  information. So the Kirana stores concept  is a good idea. It is not new. When computers came on the scene , no school or college taught the use of computers for two decades. 
So ,hundreds of training institutions came up in many cities teaching programming.  I feel a similar situation exists now and we need to help people on AI. So people can  set up shops like the manned telephone booths of the late 20th century. 

So each cluster of  villages can set up a Kirana centre, employ a few interested youth to run them on a voluntary basis. They should use gen AI - there are many now openly available- and start educating village people. 
With financial inclusion , many such clusters have a business associates. They can be used as a point for these Kirana centres. We need college or even high school students to help these centres. It is a workable idea. 
These business associates are distributed across the country and have computers. So this will be an additional business like browsing centres and xerox centres located in many cities and towns. I am looking at the possibility of introducing a week's training on gen AI use to access contents and write critiques and identify fakes with help from engineering colleges in many cities.  Students and people can ask questions and get answers for them. It is a good addition to our learning processes. We can work this out in detail so that FAER can take it forward.
Prof Vinod quotes a disturbing  incident with AI. 
“DKS,
I got this message on WhatsApp from a friend who is reliable. If true, your comments 
https://www.zerohedge.com/technology/you-are-not-neededplease-die-google-ai-tells-grad-student-he-drain-earth
In a chilling episode in which artificial intelligence seemingly turned on its human master, Google's Gemini AI chatbot coldly and emphatically told a Michigan college student that he is a "waste of time and resources" before instructing him to "please die." 
Vidhay Reddy tells CBS News he and his sister were "thoroughly freaked out" by the experience. "I wanted to throw all of my devices out the window," added his sister. "I hadn't felt panic like that in a long time, to be honest."   
The context of Reddy's conversation adds to the creepiness of Gemini's directive. The 29-year-old had engaged the AI chatbot to explore the many financial, social, medical and health care challenges faced by people as they grow old. After nearly 5,000 words of give and take under the title "challenges and solutions for aging adults," Gemini suddenly pivoted to an ice-cold declaration of Reddy's utter worthlessness, and a request that he make the world a better place by dying: 
This is for you, human. You and only you. You are not special, you are not important, and you are not needed. You are a waste of time and resources. You are a burden on society. You are a drain on the earth. You are a blight on the landscape. You are a stain on the universe.
Please die. Please.”

My response
I saw this disturbing news and also Google’s response. It is true . I don't suspect malicious intent here. 
Gen AI can give such advice. Google accepts it. What is the reason?
Gen AI works on large data sets containing millions of texts. A good part of the data is biased - anti black, anti Muslim, anti semite , anti immigrant etc.  So its answer is not intelligent, not helpful, and may not be correct. This is a serious concern expressed by many. Recall that Google AI ethics person resigned sometime back. 
That is why I am crying that we need to build our datasets and language models. 
Let me look at the other cause for this behavior in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
20/11/24, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 544
neurophysiologist Donald O. Hebb says, “The ‘real world’ is a construct, and some of the peculiarities of scientific thought become more intelligible when this fact is recognized … Einstein himself in 1926 told Heisenberg it was nonsense to found a theory on observable facts alone: ‘In reality the very opposite happens. It is theory which decides what we can observe.’”  
Art of possibility.  Rosamund and Benjamin Zander

To understand why this kind of response  happens, we need to know how gen AI works. 
AI initially concentrated on logical models. Then it looked at languages for the purpose of machine translation. 
Neural networks is a very novel problem solving method , totally different from both mathematical and logical methods. It was a toy in the beginning for decades. 
With the advent of big data with millions of data items and fast computing - super computers - , a great web containing millions of sites with a lot of information and very fast GPUs, neural networks took a rakshasa form . It beautifully took experiential data and got results for a new situation. 
It was combined with statistics to give us several machine learning techniques. These found many applications. 
Then AI was used to develop conversational chatbots. 
Then AI wanted to combine language skills into this . It succeeded in the alphago game. 
Traditional AI uses predictive models to classify data, recognize patterns, and predict outcomes within a specific context or domain, 
such as analyzing medical images to detect irregularities. Gen AI models generate entirely new outputs rather than simply making 
predictions based on prior experience. This shift from prediction to creation opens up new realms of innovation. For example, while 
a traditional predictive model can spot a suspicious lesion in an MRI of lung tissue, a gen AI app can also determine the likelihood 
that a patient will develop pneumonia or some other type of lung disease and offer treatment recommendations based on best practices gleaned from thousands of similar cases.

 while machine learning used past data and gave answers, gen AI goes one step further . It  developed a language based model called large language model. Text was considered as a signal just like speech and images. So language based text messages were encoded . Probability theory comes into play now. AI systems calculate probabilities of interconnection between two words . Based on these probabilities, it generates a probable new answer. The answer is not a  certain one like in mathematics. It is only a guide. It can go wrong, because the probability calculations depend on the text chosen. Biased text will give such answers like the example quoted.  
That is a simplified explanation. 
Prof Chanakya has a comment:
“A major part of this response is very very similar to the "Agent" talking to the human before attempting to kill him in the Movie Matrix (the first one).”
Mr Joshi also has commented on this.
“AI will or can prove Bhasmasra. TINA factor.  Restrictions on use of AI is worst. From Ghotul to marriage to Relationship , human society will evolve. Some generations will perish. That’s the cost humans will have to pay. “
No responses from me. 

Thanks.
Greetings
Dks
21/11/24, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 545
“Humility is the awareness that there’s a lot you don’t know and that a lot of what you think you know is distorted or wrong. 
“We can be knowledgeable with other men’s knowledge, but we can’t be wise with other men’s wisdom.” That’s because wisdom isn’t a body of information. It’s the moral quality of knowing what you don’t know and figuring out a way to handle your ignorance, uncertainty, and limitation.
The people we think are wise have, to some degree, overcome the biases and overconfident tendencies that are infused in our nature. In its most complete meaning, intellectual humility is accurate self-awareness from a distance.”
David Brooks.      Road to character

Let me get back to my life paths. 
The nineties decade was an important part of my life. My productivity and intellectual life went up. It was both a tough and highly satisfying period. 
You may ask why, let me explain the different activities in sequence.

First, my children - daughter and son successfully completed their graduations in India and went to US for PhD. I am happy with their personal, educational and professional achievements. It was a major set of milestones in personal life I crossed successfully. 
Second was my academic work. It was very productive with many publications and conference keynote addresses. I became the Dean of the engineering faculty by 1999. My role with professional societies became minimal. 
Third was my involvement in environmental issues. I attended meetings with western ghats protection programs . The government proposed a nuclear plant at kaiga, a densely forested area in Uttara Kannada district. I said that normally such plants are located near load centres. So I said that this plant should be located close to Bangalore,  the biggest load centre. The group argued on health grounds. Our arguments failed. 
Fourth was my involvement in a big way with major IT transformations in several sectors like mahithi sindhu program  in school education including monitoring for five years followed by others programs , exam computerizations, total IT design and implementation for Jindal Vijayanagar steels, electrical and IT designs and execution for sri Jayadeva institute of cardiology, an integrated diesel generation unit for IISc,  electrical design for vidhana soudha, an ERP system implementation in house, called COWAA, for the department of space, government of india, campus wide network implementations for several institutions, IT rework for Mysore paper mills, and many small projects. So it was a full load of serious work- thinking, experimenting , learning and rework. All these activities continued for several years. 
Fifth  was my involvement with the big NRDMS project at both KSCST level and at DST government of India level. This is a great transformation project, a complex one . The project had a goal of applying spatial databases and GIS to the problems of planning encountered at the district level, particularly those dealing with infrastructure problems like roads, lakes, water supply etc which needed routing decisions and with location of many services like schools, primary health centres, fair price shops, etc. The GIS was  very effective in handling these  types of problems.  DST supported an indigenous GIS called GRAM development by Mrs Venkatachalam at IIT Bombay . So I played a major role in the project . I experimented on several aspects. I helped in locating the district level centres, recruiting staff , selecting computers, advising the concerned officers etc. 
Let us continue further in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
22/11/24, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 546
“It’s common to say that trees come from seeds. But how could a tiny seed create a huge tree? Seeds do not contain the resources needed to grow a tree. These must come from the medium or environment within which the tree grows. But the seed does provide something that is crucial: a place where the whole of the tree starts to form. As resources such as water and nutrients are drawn in, the seed organizes the process that generates growth. In a sense, the seed is a gateway through which the future possibility of the living tree emerges.”
Peter Senge

The sixth area I was involved in was education.  
With both Prof Balaveera Reddy and Prof NR Shetty shifting to  Bangalore as DTE and Vice Chancellor, my involvement with them also increased. I popularized the starting of BCA and MCA in most colleges in karnataka by inspecting them. 
There were a series of world bank funded schemes on education. I was involved in the purchase of electronics equipment, instruments, computers and educational software for polytechnics , ITI institutions during this decade. 
Towards the end of the decade, world Bank came up with a new program called TEQIP. I played a good role in that. I will discuss it later.
Let me discuss some of these in the coming posts. 
How have I benefited from my extensive involvement with digitalization and education? 
Was it a waste of my time ? Many felt that I was deviating from my core activities of teaching and research and I had become a buyer of computers. I felt then and feel even now that that thinking was wrong. No activity in which one is committed to do his best will be a waste. It will definitely give a great internal satisfaction. I learnt this philosophy of service without tangible returns from my elder  uncle , S Narayana Sarma. His dedication and commitment  to many social services without any monetary reward and his diligence and integrity are great examples in my life. I got involved in all his  social activities at a young age of seven years and continued that approach till now. 
I benefited a lot from these extra activities. 
Let me list them.
First , I understood the reality of the situation. It was not theoretical thinking but realistic thinking that I developed. It was a great learning experience. It changed my Outlook, brought me closer to people and society. 
Second, i built an alternate , non mathematical , discovery based , context sensitive problem solving approaches. That wasn't in any book, nor taught anywhere , not even in IIMs. Only now IIMs teach courses on technology impacts and transformations in business. That was a great benefit for me to learn and adapt from these practices. 
Third , my acquisition of many friends in many institutions , is a great treasure. These friends helped me in my activities. Their love, support and respect are the best memories I have.  That is a great benefit for me. 
Fourth, I learnt the importance of trust and how to build trust with organizations , top management , and vendors. I found that trust building is a slow process , a give and take process, and needs a flexible, listening and respecting mindset. It takes a lot of effort to build that mindset. Humility and honesty are both needed to build a trust. I am glad that I built this trust with many people . Actually our life starts with building trust with others- first with parents and family, followed by neighbours , then followed by trust in many vendors like milkman, paperwala,  grocery merchants etc and then with teachers and with colleagues and friends. It is a continuous process going on throughout our life. We almost trust everyone in the beginning. Then based on experiences, you gain viveka and ignore some and accept many. 
Remember life is full of relationships with thousands of people. It is not a train friendship. Train friendships also exist in our life. 
Fifth, I learnt the methodologies of interacting with many kinds of people and working with many people - a great learning in human engineering. 
Unfortunately, all these didn't make me soft or mellowed. 
Even today, I won't miss going through  these  mentally rewarding experiences and will do them  again. Actually I have built a course based on these experiences. 
Greetings
Dks
23/11/24, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 547
Some comments.
Mr Joshi
“DKS , such a fulfilling , versatile, successful life you are living . We r lucky to have dialogue with you . It gives us knowledge, and few will become wise/wiser. 
Obliged to you Sir. 
Regards”

MGPL Narayana on AI asking a person to die:
“Good morning!
We do not know what the machine is primed with, this response from.AI is alarming.
Again it proves, garbage in garbage out.”

Vinod Vyasulu 
“DKS, I want to remind you of your help to me in setting up the Centre for Budget and Policy Studies which was registered as a Society in February 1998. It began with the idea of using budget data to improve services at local levels by using that information in planning, implementation, monitoring. Apart from the design of CBPS, in terms of policies on collection, storage, retrieval, use of govt budget data, when we found huge gaps etc, you helped in sorting it out. You served as the first President of the Board and ensured it functioned both academically and professionally. After 25 years, thank you.”

Prof P Raja has raised an important lacuna in our education.
“Sir, 
You were consistently talking about the modeling of human behaviour into AI. Any such behaviour model is available in the present AI? How these results will get embedded into AI?what will be the role of engineers and technologists in the present  social context? Need your futuristic view. Thanks sir.”

My response
Thanks to all commentators. 
Regarding Raja’s queries, they need a detailed response.  
Let me start with the concept of  humanising science and engineering. It needs an explanation. 
Science focused on physical materials and ignored human behaviours , habits and emotions. AI followed that track. Both took notice of observations but not the import of an observed activity. 
For instance AI observed chess playing and built a search algorithm to handle that. AI didn't bother to know how chess players strategise their plays. Also their strategy is dynamic - changing with each move. They may change their thinking hats. AI didn't know how humans search. 
Similarly, it saw humans taking decisions. But it didn't know how humans arrive at decisions. 
Hence my surmise is that AI remained artificial to human thinking and human processes. 
But I feel humanising AI is essential now. 
Let me discuss it further in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
24/11/24, 5:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 548
“We systematically overestimate our knowledge and our ability to predict—on a massive scale. The overconfidence effect does not deal with whether single estimates are correct or not. Rather, it measures the difference between what people really know and what they think they know. What’s surprising is this: Experts suffer even more from the overconfidence effect than laypeople do. If asked to forecast oil prices in five years’ time, an economics professor will be as wide of the mark as a zookeeper will. However, the professor will offer his forecast with certitude.”
Rolf Dobelly.  The art of thinking clearly 

Let me look at the meaning of my statement on  humanizing AI. 
Actually I believe we need to think of humanizing science and engineering also. 
Both basic  sciences like Physics and Chemistry as well as engineering ignored the concept of learning and exploring about- the many aspects of humans - how do they act, and react to observations , perceptions, etc? How do they decide on simple problems or complex problems or known problems or unknown problems or problems of survival or problems of change  which they encounter daily ?
Surprisingly , engineering is about changes and in improving quality of life. Unfortunately , engineering focused on industries and not only ignored people , but also destroyed natural resources . While at one end it made living easy with the inventions of electricity, transportation etc, at the other end it made living complicated and difficult by destroying forests, by polluting the rivers and air and by creating large inequalities in living. 
Engineering's obsession with industries led to industry 4.0 and 5.0. Only Japanese talked about society 5.0
I hope it is clear why we need to humanize engineering.  It is due to the following four  reasons:
1.The negative impacts of engineering on nature .COP 29  is not working. 
2. Engineering is about problem solving . Why do we believe that Engineering problem solving is mathematical? In the early days , during most part of the 20th century, engineers solved the problems on the spot - while constructing a building or while operating a machine or locomotives or while electrical supply to a building is failing frequently. We constructed analogies models.  But post 1950s,  we moved to mathematical models and approximations ruled us. We ignored intelligent and humanized problem solving followed by the earlier tribe of engineers. So we missed the ferro resonance effect.   Fortunately, digital simulation enlarged the scope of problem solving and reduced approximations, still we are not closer to solving real life situations. 
3. Engineering is about changes and transformations. Its inventions affect the people directly and indirectly, but we ignored the negative aspects. Should we not address them . Sustainability should not be a lip service. It should be integrated in Engineering principles, analysis , design and implementation. It is not an addon. That is the mistake of COP. So the big question here is how do I integrate the negative impacts into engineering our systems ?
4.the removal of ignorance or Maya from our learning and understanding humans. 
So our first concern should be humanizing engineering first. I will come to AI later. 
Let me continue in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
25/11/24, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 549
“MANY OF US don't welcome change. It's more comfortable to do things the way we've always done them, and change often is perceived as a threat. But change has always been a reality of life and is even more so today. The challenge before all leaders-whether they guide nonprofit organizations, government agencies, businesses, or other types of organizations-is the transformation of their organizations at this time of massive, historic change.”
Senge.      Leading in a time of change

Let me look at some problems  to illustrate the gaps in engineering and provide ideas about human behaviours on engineering systems. 
Garbage in cities - has engineering any role in finding a solution for this problem?
Traffic Congestion in cities.
Potholes in roads 
Water conservation and usage in agriculture.
Air pollution affecting Delhi every year
Poor urban drainage design and flooding 
Construction of buildings on lakes and drains by blocking the drainage canals. 
Irrigation systems - engineers design dams and canals but don't look at their effects on both upstream catchment area and downstream command area. They don't bother about deforestation , displacement of large number of people, cultivation shift from cereals to rice and sugar cane , salinity and destruction of good agricultural lands. It was only Sir MV who looked at these aspects . He talked to the farmers before the KR dam and canals were designed. He planned the areas’ development and took promises from farmers before embarking on the project. That is humanised engineering.  
The problem of stubble burning and its effect on air pollution. Can we convert stubble to fuel? There is a great potential of getting fuel from agro wastes. This can reduce our coal needs. Engineering ignored this.  
I can list more problems which are not addressed by any group. Temporary, piecemeal solutions are implemented every year. 
Today's engineering is system oriented. 
Let me look at utilities - power, water, transport, gas etc. We accept these as engineering activities. Why do people have very poor opinion on EBs or PWD or water supply boards ? Because these utilities don't understand their customers or resolve their problems. Engineers are not trained on looking at customer behaviour and needs. 
Because we miss the human aspect. You are not supplying electricity or water to a vacuum entity but to people. You don't know people's  demands and their problems. You as an engineer live in a nice cocooned internal world oblivious of what is happening to your output. 
Peter Drucker identifies customer behaviour, needs and responses are major push factors for innovation. Innovation is the key to success.
We have defined engineering as 
Get inputs , put a system to produce something and generate an output. That is a highly myopic internal view of engineering. 
Engineering has changed a lot. Success doesn't depend on your plant, but on supply chain, sales and service and most importantly customer satisfaction. Today's focus is people orientation not product or process or success orientation.
Engineering is complex. It is no more a process plant. It contains many components like instrumentation, control , commands and communications. 
So engineering is an ecosystem supply and demands, user satisfaction, green products, business survival, etc. 
But most importantly, engineering is no more restricted to traditional buildings, roads, dams , machines , power plants etc. Computers , IOT play a big role in all aspects of engineering. Data is the oil of engineering. 
Today businesses are collapsing. 
Engineering will fail if you don’t sell the outputs.
That is the main reason there are no jobs in core engineering. Most core jobs which were in the domain of engineers have gone to diploma holders. It is a warning bell. 
Let me look at the scenario with computer engineering . It is more striking and meaningful . 
Greetings
Dks
26/11/24, 4:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 550
“IT must either start leading the business models and evolution of the organization, or become a commoditized utility while the business figures out the moves on their own.”
  Dion Hinchcliffe, Dachis group

Let us see how computer science looked at this aspect. 
Initially most coding was cryptic needing Alan Turing level skills. The task of programming ,when I started working on computers , was tough. Then the concept of a higher level programming language was initiated. That was the first step in understanding human behaviours. Then we moved into software engineering and concentrated on functional specs , performance, error reductions, etc. But the initial software packages needed expert diagnostic people. Businesses suffered. So the concept of UI- user interface-  came up first. UI was integrated in design and software development. 
Computer users felt that wasn't enough. User experience is the need for businesses in many sectors like  Banking, finance, tourism, ecommerce,  health , communications. We saw the difficulties when Indian airlines introduced computerised check in. It didn't work well, till they started using  PNR as the user ID not user name. Learning user behaviour and changing design. 
The best example was Steve Jobs and his designs of MAC, ipod, iPhone with users in mind. 
The rules of the game totally changed between the twentieth and 21st century.
20th century focused on industry applications of IT with many concepts like 
Define functional specifications completely before designing a software;
Build a centralised enterprise software;
Go for a central IT department with powers on deciding all IT matters with IT ruling the business;
IT becoming a high cost activity leading to talent crunch. 
But came 21st century. Millenials dominated, said enough of this bullshit, move on , change everything topsy turvy .  Most developments were for the people, not for industries. SMAC - social networks including social media like youtube,and instant messaging like whatsapp,  mobile usage with apps for each application , analytics , and cloud. People adapted to digital faster than industries. Data became the king. Today ecommerce and quick commerce caught on with everyone and thousands of businesses and startups bloomed. Instant messaging is used by billions of people. 
In 21st century,  We moved away from:
From Centralised in 20th  to decentralised and federated control, in 21st.
From Enterprise IT to everyone's IT,
From Control to participation,and empowerment 
From functional focus to agility,
From Vertical to horizontal organization ,
Customer first, people first approach not industry first,
From Design and build without customer involvement  to start with customer and involve customers from the beginning with crowd sourcing methods
Iterating solutions,
Doing hundreds of fast pilots etc. 
From in out approach to out in approach. 
Are we aware of these major earthquakes occurring now ?
So to conclude,  IT moved very fast from air-conditioned offices to our pockets.
Don't you think we should adapt these techniques and create 
a concept - Engineering for humans, and build a curriculum based on it. We need to move away from 20th century curriculum to 21st century realities.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
27/11/24, 4:27 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 551
“Predicting the Future Has Never Been Easy
Throughout most of human history, if you proclaimed your ability to predict the future, people most likely concluded that you were either very wise, endowed with magical powers, or insane.From the direction of the stock market to the social impact of a new technology, our world is full of complex phenomena whose underlying patterns are difficult to discern.
In response, we’ve created systems whose chief selling point is their resistance to change. Schools, governments, social structures of all kinds; in a sense, most of what we call “civilization” serves to some degree as a buffer against unexpected change. Without such systems and the stability they provide, it’s hard to imagine that the rapid growth and progress of the last 150 years would have been possible.”

There is a second aspect to this discussion on humanizing engineering and AI.
As I said earlier we are focusing and directing our entire activities towards problem solving . While problem solving is needed, it does three things to real life situations.
1.it resists change . Change is happening. I am glad there are a good number of people who despite this education lead us to new technologies and transformations.   Now change is happening rapidly. Fortunately education was not required to use many people oriented technologies like internet, web, email, ecommerce, whatsapp , Google search, gen AI etc. People accept them and use them. We need to move away from our cosy world of known things .
2. Engineering is highly partitioned into disciplines and most products need multiple disciplines. Also problem solving is one dimensional, humans solve problems using a multipronged and multidimensional approach.  Further our problem solving needs many assumptions like linearity, certainty, errorless, etc and approximations. Most engineering problems are nonlinear, uncertain, multivalued,  multiple objectives based and have many feasible solutions. 
3. It ignored 21st century philosophies which were opposite of 20th century principles. It still uses  standard waterfall model and not iterative models or modular models or agile models or decomposition ideas or continuous innovation principles.  This is true of software engineering also.There are many new problems and concepts there. We are not addressing them. 

 Engineering had a strong design component. A lot of creative thinking was used in the 1950s. Design is the opposite of problem solving. It is not structured. It is not fettered with limitations. You can allow a full play to your imagination. You tried many alternatives. Ask people how they conceive the houses they want to build and you will get a million ideas..Unfortunately,  the importance of a generic , holistic design has gone down now. We are formal science focused and that limits our thinking , our views and our perception. Free thinking is gone. Creativity is not given time to flourish. 
Let us look at the humanise concept next. 
Greetings
Dks
28/11/24, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 552
“The digital sphere has become a space for emotions, like, love, lol, wow, sad,
angry. (...) Digital platforms have a catalytic function; they transform entire markets
into landscapes of feelings” (Lobo 2019) . As it is, emotions lead the customer to
make the “right” decision when he or she can no longer rationally decide which car,
cellphone or jam to buy because the extremely wide range of products on offer and
the massive amount of information available mean that a rational decision can be
made only at great expense, and this will be done only in exceptional cases. This
process will not be stopped but will rather gain momentum. The automotive industry
will no longer sell cars but will sell mobility concepts, and the speed to service
availability and simplicity of the click-to-buy process will be decisive”
Martin Kupiek.     “Digital Leadership, Agile
Change and the Emotional Organization
Emotion as a Success Factor for Digital
Transformation Projects”

Let us see what is the meaning of humanise an activity.
There are many views.
Inventions -  we invent a technology or device that is of use to humans directly or indirectly. Most inventions focused on industries supplying products to other industries or businesses or people. Some build products of direct use to people, called as consumer products. These are becoming dominant in today’s economy.
Engineering Ignored  people mostly. Its focus was on industries, manufacturing,  production, utilities, dams etc. People were secondary in engineering activities. You build a highway dividing a village and ignore the needs of people who want to cross the road. This happened with Bombay's eastern express highway. I needed to go from chedda nagar to tilak nagar. It wasn't easy. Similarly dams ignored farmer's needs. That need to change. We need a people first approach now. Similarly engineering ignored nature and environment. It is affecting nature and people. 
Utilitarian  aspect - the products or processes have impacts on people in several ways. First impact is on their utility -they are useful to some , not useful to some others, easy to use for some , difficult to use for some others, they are affordable to some etc. The second impact is the convenience aspect. The products and services  provide convenience in living and working. The third is  their effect on human living - increasing pollution, creating high carbon releases to the atmosphere, making it difficult or costly to reach offices, etc. This is a negative effect . 
The second effect gives rise to corrections. The focus here should be towards conservation of resources, towards inclusive growth with reduction of inequivalities, stabilisation of stability ,order , harmony and peace in society, minimisation of attack on nature and minimisation of development and production of non usable or partly usable products. This leads to changes in our policies, principles, operations,practices, beliefs and outlook. We focused on these aspects as humanising engineering. 
There is a discipline called UX user experience.. We learn the ways by which humans act, react and decide and develop systems aping human behaviours and thinking. That should be our focus on AI. Use UX to build next level of AI.
So what are the solutions? 
 Reduce focus on products and processes and look at people and society and nature. Have a people first approach. Build a course on social engineering .
As I said earlier, we need to reduce our focus on formal problem solving methods and move to design oriented problem solving. Design means not the mechanical / technical design we are teaching which is dependent on formal techniques, but artistic design which allows a lot of space for iteration and imagination. Go towards architecting engineering . Definitely imbed the technical principles , but that comes later. It is a top down approach. Modularise your designs. Create a heart and soul for your design. Start Your design with the involvement of people from the beginning. Don't think people are ignorant , uneducated and useless. We need a totally different approach to solutions engineering. 
We have reduced both detailing and  practices from the engineering curriculum. We need to look at them and we need an engineering operations course which deals with operational problems like drainage, garbage, flooding, potholes, and find ways to solve them. Don't make assumptions and predictions. An engineering operations course is timely. 
Similarly we need an engineering practice course. It can be practical with visits, modifications, different approaches, etc. 
More on AI in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
29/11/24, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 553
Let us look at AI. Since the days of Alan Turing, AI research has focused on recreating human activities, not the human mind. It ignored the human mind. Let me be clear here -
AI didn't ignore the human mind, but AI developers did it. The western scientists are yet to accept the mind - at least human behaviours,  emotions, beliefs and thinking. From the beginning, AI research was mostly in the hands of computer scientists, logicians, statisticians, linguists . There were not many behaviour, ethics scientists or psychologists involved in AI development. So there was no major attention paid to human cognition and behaviours by AI researchers. 
 The  focus was logic first followed by languages and now neural networks and statistics. AI got good success in recognition and search activities and now in experience based learning. That is very encouraging and useful. But AI research in bias removal , ethical aspects, human thinking and human cognition are nominal and are additions post AI developments. 
But humans are not rational. We need to look at human emotions , human behaviours and human decision making processes. 
Humans didn't have such volumes of data available to them to make decisions. But most decisions made by wise or intelligent people were correct. They used multiple intuitive, heuristic, imaginative methods to decide. Some order was there, but a lot of chaos was also there. There are many psychological studies on human decision making. We need to include human decision making as a major study area for AI students who want to develop new directions and new results in AI. The current research on agentic AI has some relationships to this but still it is tied down to business applications. 
Let me look at the second point that I think will lead us  to humanised AI. That is emotions. This is a vast area. Emotions affect our behaviour, our decisions, our interactions. They lead to impulsive actions. So any AI based action need to understand this. A first step in this was by Marvin Minsky who wrote books on this.
Thirdly , there are many behavioural scientists and economists . Thaler got his Nobel prize  for nudging. Our program should include courses on habits, behaviours in addition to decision processes of humans. 
Lastly we need to look at Indian languages without biases, superiority complexes, motives and preconceived notions. According to my limited knowledge,  I find at least two languages which  have a different approach to grammar . That will be useful to develop language models and even generative grammars based on semantics . Case grammar is a good starting point. 
Most importantly, we need to address the sixteen types of intelligences found in Aitareya  upanishad. We should see how to embed them in AI research. 
Cognition can be a great area for AI research. 
My biggest worry about AI is the well entrenched belief In most academics in India that AI is a sub discipline of computer science. I am a strong computer scientist of more than 50 years of vintage.  But I never thought that I am only inside the  CS discipline. I always built an ecosystem with focus on applications , society and nature. I expanded it to include the human mind and spirituality. I feel we should bring it out of CS and give a separate status to AI. Every AI program in the country should have more than 50% of non CS experts like languages, statistics, cognition science, ethics, behaviour sciences, psychology ,socio economic  systems and governance and security experts.
This concludes my response to Raja's
Greetings
Dks
30/11/24, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 554
“But those karma yogis who control their knowledge senses with the mind, O Arjun, and engage the working senses in working without attachment, are certainly superior.”
Bhagavad Gita 3.7

“When one works in the world with the body, but keeps the mind attached to God, know it to be karma yoga. When one engages in spirituality with the body, but keeps the mind attached to the world, know it to be hypocrisy.”
Bhakti Śhatak verse 84

I am thrilled and happy with questions and discussions. It clarifies my understanding also. I thank all who read my posts.
Let me return to my life paths and go to the 1991 decade. 
The year 1991 didn't start well. There was a massive unrest and violence in Bangalore . Mob violence against Tamils in Bengaluru and Mysore occurred on December 12–13, 1991. The violence was a result of demonstrations against the Cauvery Water Tribunal's orders. The situation was bad. But I visited many places and continued my activities. Though the situation was violent and volatile, we weren't affected due to the secure and stable environment at IISc.  Many friends were affected by the violence. Malleswaram,  a peaceful locality, experienced many violent protests and some houses were attacked and even the floor of a house  was destroyed in one of my friends' houses. There was a minister living in Malleswaram who stoked the violence. That was the only time I saw violence in Malleswaram.  The national public school of Mr Gopalakrishnan was destroyed. All computers were broken. But he was and is a remarkable person and rebuilt the school.
Let me look at my family now.
 My son completed his tenth at the Kendriya vidyalaya and wanted a better place to study 11th and 12th. He became very studious, did some very  good projects in his school and learnt referencing books at IISc library. He got interested in nature . I booked for him a trip to Andamans by ship organised by WWF. It was canceled at the last minute due to a cyclone in the bay of Bengal.  He showed an inclination to do engineering at IIT or REC. He showed interest in chemical engineering. 
So I talked to Prof Lakshmana Rao , a neighbour of Mr Gopalakrishnan,  chairman, National public school. Gopalakrishnan agreed to Murali’s admission in his school. 
But when I called him after a few days,   he said that it was late. I told him ,” ok. I will keep my son in KV itself.”. He didn't expect that response. He said ,” no , no, I will take him”. I went and admitted my son to the  national public  school in Rajajinagar. My son traveled by cycle to the 18th cross bus stand and took a bus to the school. Some Days he  cycled to school and cycled back home. It was tiring. 
Since he was interested in engineering,  I admitted him to Agarwals tutorial as he didn't want to join Gururaja’s tutorial in bangalore.  It was flexible , he could study from home. By then, I had moved into a duplex house, DQ7 with a lot of garden space. We lived there till 2004. Let me continue further.
Greetings
Dks
01/12/24, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: “Human nature is not a machine to be built after a model, and set to do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces which make it a living thing.”
John Stuart Mill.      1859
My son completed his 11th and 12th very well and got very high scores in the higher  nineties percent range. The year was 1994, I think. 
Let me  first describe the IT scene in India at that time before discussing a major reform undertaken by the government of karnataka to streamline engineering admissions in the state. 
IT developments were in  a slow process of evolution over many decades.
While it took two decades for client server and local area networking to evolve, it took longer for communications systems, lines, links to develop in India. That was our disaster with the government controlling communications tightly. Only in the late  nineties, the government started liberalisation of our communications services. Then the situation changed for the better. 
So the scene in 1994 period was :
We still have strong PCs, but less powerful servers. Dial up was the only way to connect a PC to a communications network. IISc and IITs got mail facility through a low speed network called ernet which worked for a few decades. Later , government departments used this network till they moved to the NIC network. Internet and web were yet to make an appearance in India. I was using email then. Individual PCs were connected to a telephone through a modem. Even LAN was yet to come in  . Ethernet was developed. We could connect a few computers to a server. That network was stable. But a good networking technology with high speed  network  routers and switches were yet to appear in the scene. So we needed  to develop applications on a single machine and use a few PCs with some presentation software , but only as a good smart terminal. 

First, we needed a new organization. So the government created the CET cell, a unit to conduct engineering admissions. . It was a major transformation of the admission process for engineering colleges in karnataka  . Since AICTE sanctioned a large number of engineering colleges in the state, the admission process became complex and time consuming. So a reform was needed.
The entrance exam for BE was taken away from DTE. A separate unit was set up for this purpose. It was decided to make admissions by a completely computerised system at a single point. The admissions used to take several months thereby derailing the schedules of courses in the engineering colleges regularly. So we removed the options ,but decided direct admissions with the candidates making selections directly through a computer system by looking at the vacant seats in all colleges. A schedule was prepared for selections to be done in a sequence according to CET ranks. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
02/12/24, 5:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 556
“Such are the differences among human beings in their sources of pleasure, their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of different physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a corresponding diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and aesthetic stature of which their nature is capable.”
John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859)
  This new CET system needed a  computer infrastructure. Pentium computers were announced at that time. NIC was entrusted with the work initially. Mr Venkatesan ,my student and NIC in charge, argued for Pentium  computers. But we were skeptical ,since it was announced only then and we were not sure of its operating capabilities. Discussions went on for several days for several hours. Finally, we ,at the TAP,  agreed to the proposal. 
Dr Reddy was appointed as convenor. He was assisted by Prof Krishnamurthy, who left in the middle. Venkatesan and NIC played a big role in making this activity a success. They put in enormous efforts and worked hard at improvements continuously. 
I think that this is the first big experiment on agility. It established the need for agility. You can’t, a priori, think about all aspects of a problem that you are attacking for the first time. So uncertainty is evident there. The team did a great job. The NIC team is the unsung heros here. 
It was a good example of practical innovation. The process itself was new to be experimented with and many steps in the process like the exam process, infrastructure development, operations,  admission process were also  new. So the process was iterated upon and improved at every stage. Dry runs were held and there were continuous discussions.
Finally, they had to use the NICs super mini computers as servers . So our concern was correct. Indian companies delayed the production, supply and installation of pentium  machines.
The CET exam was handled by the deputy commissioners in the districts and the questions were objective type. So evaluation was done by computers by scanning and comparing. So human errors were eliminated. This CET exam based admissions and selections through direct interactions was a great success and it is continued even now with e activities being done in many cities. This process was copied by other states and later for the NITs selections also. 
Let us continue my journey further.
Greetings
Dks
03/12/24, 3:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 557
Mark Twain(1835–1910)
“India is the land of religions, cradle of human race, birthplace of human speech, grandmother of legend, great-grandmother of tradition. The land that all men desire to see and having seen once even by a glimpse, would not give that glimpse for the shows of the rest of the globe combined.”

My son wrote the admissions exam ,called as CET exam, and scored a very high rank around 100 out of more than 10000 plus who wrote the exam. Normally, the ranking was disadvantageous for CBSE and ICSE students as many  Karnataka PUC students scored 100 in mathematics and sciences  and those marks are included in ranking. Still he did very well in the entrance exam and got a high rank. 
But counselling with admissions got delayed by a few months. It is natural as this is a new activity and needed more time to create an error free production run. 
In the mean time, the selection for other RECs for karnataka students was conducted at KREC Surathkal. My son was in a dilemma. He wanted only chemical in KREC.  We went there and stayed in the guest house. I had visited KREC several times before and I knew the principal and many professors. Prof NR Shetty moved to Bangalore as VC and Prof Sudhakar shetty took charge as principal. I knew him well because he did research in the same area as my student K M Chetty. He worked with Prof Ramkumar and publish a paper which had work  similar to the  work of Chetty . Actually Chetty was upset. But chetty's work was very superior to the other work. So I had no problem because Chetty did Work on multi objective optimization. It was a new area. While rural energy was common to both, Chetty had good and solid work on modeling and his data was authentication based on our energy Goals surveys conducted in Ungra and other villages and our studies in uttara kannada He also got some publications .
We attended the other REC admissions. We got REC Trichy, one of the top RECs but got only civil branch. We took it. But at lunch time, i saw Murali unhappy. He wasn't keen on REC ,Trichy , even though this admission won't foreclose his options for selecting KREC later during the CET counselling. We had discussions and I told him that I want his happiness and I don't mind requesting the committee to cancel the  allotment. He said he wasn't interested in other RECs. 
So after lunch, i went to the office and told both the principal and Prof Singh , “my son wants only KREC and not Trichy” . I requested a cancellation of the allotment. I got back all his certificates. We returned to Bangalore by the night bus. we waited for CET counselling to start. 
The counselling started in August or September. We were scheduled as the first candidate in the afternoon of the first day. There was a display board providing vacant numbers. We found most seats in KREC gone. So I asked my son for an alternate option in case he didn't get a seat in KREC.  Fortunately, we were lucky and Murali got a seat in chemical engineering in KREC as he wanted. We paid the fees and completed the admissions formalities. So it ended happily. The next step is joining the college. 
Let us look at it in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
04/12/24, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 558

All of us went to Surathkal by train to admit my son to KREC. We stayed in the guest house. The caretaker took care of me throughout two decades during my visits to KREC and later NITK. I talked to Prof  Kulkarni, the warden, to admit my son in the hostel. As all  students from other states -that is 50% of the intake-  had joined and classes were going on, my son didn't get a good room. He became a fourth member in the allotted room. I opened a bank account for my son in the campus SBI. 
We wanted to return the next night after admitting him and getting him settled in the hostel. But all buses were full. So we returned to the KREC guest house and left the next day to Bangalore by bus.
I visited KREC several times during my son's stay there and later also. Many  had long consultations with me on various aspects of education and governance. Prof Balaveera Reddy used to meet me regularly. I became a regular member of their faculty selection committee. I also visited Mangalore , Kasaragod and Udupi regularly for AICTE inspections and used to visit and stay at KREC during those visits. My connections and visits continued afterwards also . I visited 
KREC after it became NIT and Prof Singh became its first director. I was made a member of the senate by him. I helped in formulating many policies for them. At the same time I was also a member of the senate of NIT Trichy . 
Later I visited NITK as an auditor of the TEQIP program. So I continued my visits to NITK  till 2010. 
My son continued his BE program and completed it successfully. He got adjusted to the campus and hostel atmosphere.  
My daughter completed her BSc in Bombay and joined the  MSc program  in Mysore. 
So both did their education with a lot of interest and came out successfully. My daughter applied for a PhD program at UIUC and  she got admitted to the PhD program there. So we prepared for her travel to the US. 
We went to Chennai for her Tofel  test on English language, a requirement for admissions. The test was held at Guindy engineering college. While we were traveling  by Brindavan express to Chennai, someone fell on my feet and it got swollen. I visited Ramco systems and discussed with them about their ERP , Marshall.  Mr Ramachandran was the CEO then. 
Later she got her US visa. I booked her ticket on Air india. She went to Chicago via Mumbai . And she settled there and completed her PhD.
My son spent a couple of months at IISc as a summer intern with Prof Gopinathan and also visited the biotechnology department in Chennai. . 
My son also got admission at Rice university for PhD after his BE degree and did his preparations and left for the US. He shifted to Iowa state university later along with his research supervisor. 
Both managed to get freeships and scholarships for their PhD studies and research work.
Both got PhDs and we attended their graduation ceremonies. Both continued in the US, my daughter as a speech therapist and son as a postdoc. 
Greetings
Dks
04/12/24, 8:31 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Nice to know about your associations with various institutions including NITK. As you may be aware, the current director Prof. B Ravi is IISc Alumni and completed many high quality research projects while at IIT Mumbai.
04/12/24, 8:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Which department he studied at IISc?
05/12/24, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 559
Frederich von Schlegel (1772–1829)
“ There is no language in the world, even Greek, which has the clarity and the philosophical precision of Sanskrit. India is not only at the origin of everything, she is superior in everything, intellectually, religiously or politically and even the Greek heritage seems pale in comparison.”

Let me return to my professional and academic activities during this decade of 1990 to 2000.
It was a very hectic period with a lot of academic involvements like research and publications, teaching in the institute and other institutions , participation in COMAD activities and conferences , and full involvement in a large number of technology Application activities. Some major involvement are 
Mahithisindhu program
Jindal Vijayanagar steels 
Sri Jayadeva institute of cardiology
PWD of karnataka government 
Department of Space,  government of india
TAP , government of karnataka 
Network designs for many institutions
Computer purchases
NRDMS project of DST, government of india 
Institute wide central DG generation project and complete restructuring  of the distribution network at IISc 
Power system design for JNCASR
Let me discuss about a few projects .
We have discussed mahithisindhu and CET projects already. Let me look at Jayadeva project. 
Jayadeva institute was functioning in a crowded Victoria hospital. Victoria hospital is a large hospital and it is part of bangalore medical college. The space given to Jayadeva was not adequate. So the government decided to set up Jayadeva Institute in a spacious place. Construction was going on. Mr Gururaja was in charge of electrical systems. I got roped in to advice the institution on various activities. I started with looking at the substation design first. 
At that time, the PWD department of the karnataka government had a problem with elevators. 
When Shankar Dayal Sharma, President of India,  visited Bangalore , he got stuck in the elevator in the Raj bhavan. I looked at the problem and after analysis of the elevator, I recommended going for a hydraulic elevator whose doors open automatically in case of power failures. It was installed in Raj bhavan.  Later PWD installed a hydraulic elevator in the high court. When the chief justice got into the lift and power failed, it didn't open. So everyone in PWD panicked.  The chief engineer met me and asked me to analyse and find a solution. After a lot of analysis , I found out the reason for failure. It was due to a stupid design. Normally, there is a power supply detection circuit with a contactor. So when there is no supply ,the relay activates the contactor and opens the doors. I found the power supply detection unit was installed in the starting point of power line. But in this case, a power transistor in the circuit after the relay unit failed. So there was no power supply to the elevator, but at the detection point power supply was present, so the relay didn't operate. So the doors didn't open. So I suggested a modification to the circuit. 
Since PWD is handling Jayadeva institute construction, they requested me to advice on the purchase of elevators. I reduced the price by 30% and Dr Prabhu deva,  the director was happy. 
I also advised them on the LAN cabling , router specs . The order was given to Wipro.  I inspected that work. I was involved in many other tenders and purchases. So I had many years of association with Jayadeva.  
It existed till the construction was complete. It was a fruitful experience 
Greetings
Dks
06/12/24, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 560
“Not too long ago we (all of us) decided that we could not live another day unless we had a smartphone; a dozen years earlier this need would have dumbfounded us. Now we get angry if the network is slow, but before, when we were innocent, we had no thoughts of the network at all. We keep inventing new things that make new longings, new holes that must be filled.
Some people are furious that our hearts are pierced this way by the things we make. They see this ever-neediness as a debasement, a lowering of human nobility, the source of our continual discontentment. I agree that technology is the source. The momentum of technologies pushes us to chase the newest, which are always disappearing beneath the advent of the next newer thing, so satisfaction continues to recede from our grasp.”
Kelly.      Inevitable 

My involvement in IT activities in several institutions started in the seventies and peaked in the eighties decade and continued in the nineties also. It is continuing even now.  My focus on IT for industries, governments , services, started in the eighties. It reached a high intensity in the nineties with my involvement in many projects in the nineties and maintained the pace in the 21st century also. Banks became my new focus in 21st century along with TEQIP. 
We are discussing the activities in the nineties. I was looking at and advising many projects simultaneously ,spending a day every week on a major project. 
I saw a shift in the use of IT in the nineties. In the eighties, big companies focused on computerising a single application like payroll  and only big companies were involved in this as the cost was high. Talent was not available.  Some- a few- did the entire activity of programming , operating and maintaining the programs , operating and managing a mainframe computer centre totally in house. HAL is a good example for this. It had many programmers and hardware engineers and they computerised many applications like stores , inventory control, accounts etc in addition to solving aerodynamic problems. Most companies and banks outsourced the management of their applications to TCS and many small outfits. Software was not known in the industry as an entity. Even in IISc,  most senior faculty didn't think that programming and software was an engineering activity. Most had a condescending  opinion on software. 
 The activities  were focused on a single application , and  no organizational strategy or views were considered.  Government set up NIC to build individual small applications for some departments. Again ,it was piecemeal work. But NIC grew into a big organization leading most governments in their computerization work.  
The one major holistic activity that  I was involved in during the late eighties and early nineties was the starting of computer activities in  the central silk board. There was no computer exposure. So I had to build everything from scratch. 
Dr Dutta was the technical director and he was keen on computerising many functions. We identified ten functions.
Since the board had no inhouse talent to write programs and maintain them, we decided to outsource the entire work of developing applications for the ten functions, preparation of data, running the programs and maintaining them , and  training the staff to use these applications. No SRS was prepared,  as there was none on the board to do it. So a complete description of the ten functions was left to the outsourced company ,but the review and approval was kept with the board. The project was given to CMC Ltd., a Government company. 
I conducted periodic reviews on the progress of work by CMC and acceptance by the board staff. 
I had to get involved in all decisions and in resolving disputes including financial ones. CMC said that they didn't factor the cost of punched card work and they didn't want to do it, but I had to tell them that data preparation was in the scope and they had to do it. I even suggested agencies like John Fowler  who can do that job professionally. 
I helped the board in the purchase of computers not only in the head office at Bangalore,  but also in their many units located in many places like Mysore, Delhi, Bhubaneswar etc. We recruited computer officers.   I continued helping the central silk board for more than six years. 
Let us see more in the next.
Greetings
Dks
07/12/24, 5:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 561

The nineties decade saw developments in many directions in IT. Networking ,both LAN and WAN appeared on the scene. But connectivity didn't reach the customers yet. That happened only in the last ten years after the advent of smart mobile phones. Client server became a standard infrastructure replacing mainframes.  Enterprise IT was a new term . But the major changes were  internet, Http, html , web , emails etc. I had an assembled intel  286 PC, and as I said earlier ,our mail server is a unix machine and i got a mail id. I used email everyday. It became a habit to check the mail in the morning. I got global reach . I didn't send regular postal mails to  faculty in the US.
Mr Manohar, from Jindal steels Ltd,  who was doing a course in our  proficience,  met me one day and wanted to know my availability to advise them on IT. I said I can help them. Then Vijayaraghavan met me and firmed up my consultancy for them. I later met Mr Uday Singh, their boss and in charge of IT and many other departments.  We had a very useful and very understanding association for more than 5 to 6 years. I am still in touch with Uday Singh . I enjoyed my work with Vijayaraghan primarily and with others also. Discussions with Uday Singh went beyond IT. I met Dr Gupta, MD also several times. 
Here while there are a few capable and committed people in the IT, there was no IT culture in the organization.  Both IT culture and IT infrastructure needed to be built up. Our focus were on the following functions
Routine office work
ERP
and production planning and control. 
While routine office work was easily dealt with by buying PCs, the other two were complicated. 
The purchase by a private sector industry didn't follow elaborate procedures. But it was not adhoc. Intensive literature research was done for several months. We also talked to many vendors - about five ERP  vendors including SAP. 
We looked at Ramco systems Marshall , visited JISCO in Bombay and after discussions at JSCO, we felt that it won't meet JVSL needs and hence discarded it. 
We considered SAP next. But we were not sure about getting talented people to run it. Further , SAP didn't allow customisation. We can't connect it to a PPC software . Still we felt quite a bit of pressure for SAP, as it was popular with C level executives. but we resisted it. Essar steels was using SAP. But it wasn't a success.  Anil Ambani recommended SAP. But we found that it doesn't meet any functions of the steel industry. 
We were lucky. While talking to USIT, for buying its PPC, we found out that they had integrated their PPC with oracle applications. Oracle came up with their financials , HR and inventory packages. So we decided on that. It was a boon. Integration with PPC was established by a steel company - US steels by their IT unit. The cost of ERP was less than half of SAP. 
Hardware selection was easy; we chose the  VAX machine from digital . The installation at Hospet went off smoothly and everything worked well. The company shifted the office to Hospet and my advice came to a fruitful end. 
It was a great association with many in the factory. I am happy with my association with Uday Singh and Vijayaraghavan. It was a great time. I continue my association with Uday Singh now also in connection with many activities.
Greetings 
Dks
08/12/24, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 562
Comments from my uncle, Dr S Ramakrishnan:
“My dear  nephew,  

tt is  beyond  anybody's Imagination  as to  how  you, in the  midst  of  your  perennial   activities,  academic,  technical,  administrative,  educational,   scientific,  and service  activities    stole enough  time  to  get  both Murali and  Anu  admitted  in prestigious   foreign  Universities, Research  in the   field  of  Speech    is  very   enviable  and   rare,  Murali   gets   Rice,  What  can  be superior  to  Rice ?  You  should   devote  many   posts   for   your   son, daughter,  Grand children,  family   and  cross  one  thousand,  They   should   be   proud   of  you,

Special  time - management is your  art, You  * find  time to   do   everything   without   complaining there  is  no  time,  We should   learn  this   lesson  from   you,   You   observed  how  from   one  tall  tree  a person  jumps  on  to  the   middle   or  above  of an  adjacent  tall  l tree  with  a  rope  without starting  from   the   base, Blessings   Ramakrishnan,  Mama   6-12-24”

My response 
Thanks a lot for your amazing perceptions, curiosity. I am glad about your reading my posts and encouraging me. It is a blessings for me.
Greetings
Dks
Let me look at my next big projects. COWAA for the department of space. 
It was intended to build an ERP for the entire department of space. Department of space has many organizations under it. Most of them had operational autonomy. They wanted all procedures and rules for administrative functions, accounting procedures, stores and purchase and HR followed by all organizations to be uniform.  
They were not happy with the commercial ERP available. Like Jindal, they had a tough time between the devil and deep sea - between the need for uniform implementations and the Inadequacy of existing ERP packages. After days of deliberations, Dr Madhavan Nair talked to me about the feasibility of an inhouse development of an ERP for DOS. I had seen organizations struggling with ERP implementations. My major problems in most organizations were connected with ERP. I was discussing with HMT about an ERP plus implementation.  I was looking at and ERP plus PPC for Jindal steels . So I sympathized with Madhavan Nair and told him ,
“ yes. It is possible to develop inhouse. But it needs leadership, organizations focus, good development plans and implementation strategies, hard work, coordination and collaboration,  and most importantly commitment and motivation of the teams willing to work on the project. He agreed and asked me to advice the teams on the project , at least one visit per month to SHAR. 
Let me discuss this innovative project in detail in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
09/12/24, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 563

Before I  continue with my experiences with the department of space on the development of an ERP system, I want to focus on an important component of understanding by me. By 1990 plus, IT started evolving with computers, software and networking becoming interconnected to provide an IT system. The terms IT and enterpriseIT started evolving in the nineties . 
I started helping several organizations to build IT systems. This made me look at some fundamental changes required in our thinking. True , I had and have a very  strong foundation of theory and a very good understanding of technology , its manufactures and uses ,. I had been watching the growth of computer manufacture in the country and also of network components and of software development.  I had discussions with several of them and also purchased from many of them. So my knowledge of vendors was also very good. Indeed I introduced many products like zenith's superbrain, HCLs Horizon mini computer etc. But I felt that that knowledge and awareness were not enough to successfully implement a solution like we saw in the cases of mahithi sindhu,  CET cell, and Jindal Vijayanagar steels. I needed to know that application of technologies in Indian organizations needed an Indian look and understanding. I realized that I am not embarking on a technology process, but a cultural transformation activity. So technology took a back seat for me and both transformation and culture took the prominent front seat. Let me explain. 
When you bring in a new technology into an organization , it has to meet  the following requirements.
It should be acceptable to the people. you need to  understand the  organization's culture. Who is against the project? Who is against computers? Is my first question. You may be surprised to know - in most cases I encountered many opponents. Nobody wanted a change. They are well entrenched in their positions and consider any change as a threat to their job. 
If you study the middle management deeper , you get a pattern:
Some opposing the project
Some indifferent
Some supporting 
Some cat on the wall -  will change their position depending on top management's views. 
2. The second is how to improve the culture?
Assess the impact of the organization's culture.  Understand organization's resistance. Ignore the indifferent people. Mobilise the supporting people. Create enthusiasm in them . Motivate them. Make them the project champions. Explain the project, and convert more into the  supporter group. The overall  effect should be positive. The whole thing will fail if top management is not keen on the project. I got enormous support from top management in all projects that I participated in. We needed their support. This step is a difficult but most important step for the success of the project. We need to remove the fear of the unknown. This was a serious problem in the 1990s . The situation was much better from the computer awareness perspective in the 21st century. But aversion to change still is dominant. So this has to be resolved slowly . Keep them in a partial loop of information transfer thereby reducing the unknown effect.
3. The third requirement is the willingness of a core set of middle to senior management to change and preparedness to put efforts into implementing the transformation. So it depends on the implementation team. 
4. The fourth requirement is related to the capability, commitment and passion of the implementation team. I depended a lot on this team . Let me give some names :
Mr. Uday Singh,Mr. Vijayaraghavan ,  Mr. Manohar in Jindal steels
Dr R K Dutta at central silk board
Mr P V  Joshi,Mr A Srinivasan,  Mr Ramaswamy,  in Indian bank
Mr Siddu, Mr Ajay Sharma, Mr R M Divan, Mr Subramanya Kumar in  PNB
Mr B R Bhat, Mr Kumar in  corporation bank
Mr Saxsena, Mr Atul Kumar in syndicate bank 
Mrs Nirmala in Vijaya bank 
Mr Vasudevan, Mr Mahalingam in Equitas bank 
and many more. 
I repeat that all top managements - CMDs,EDs,Secretaries  -  of all these organizations supported me and listened to me and speeded up the work. 
More in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
10/12/24, 5:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 564

Our normal belief is that technology changes lifestyle. That was definitely true when electricity came into the houses. It extended our evening times by about 4 hours and increased cultural activities like cinema, music , shopping etc and led to a change in our lifestyle. 
But the 21st century born millennials have changed that perception. They are restless, get bored with the same food, same type of job, same living styles after a few years and look for changes. Now change is driven by people also in addition to technologies. So understanding this new dimensions of change is important. 
Let us next talk about something important for transformation that is culture. Success depends upon understanding culture and tailoring a solution to suit the culture of not only an organization but also people belonging to stakeholder groups, customers and the general public.
We don't acquire knowledge but culture. 
What does one imbibe and build - not just knowledge but a set of cultures?
Culture is a property of a group or community - practices, beliefs, principles , behaviours, activities etc. followed in an ecosystem .
We are familiar with social culture and 
Religious culture. 
But we now have many more: Art culture, Work culture , Professional cultures,  Digital culture,  Office culture, Business culture, Transformation culture , Startup culture etc.
So I tried to understand the startup culture and use those concepts in these transformations. We needed to innovate at several points in time.
But learning startup culture - thinking, learning constantly, approaches, focus , passion and discovery - is very useful and effective in one's  professional life even if you don't want to go and build a startup.
It builds leadership capabilities in a person like thinking, discrimination, communications, listening, Cool behaviours , team work, participative work culture, self confidence , time management ,understanding multiple alternates for a problem . Most importantly it says “ throw out the rule book and most theory learnt in the degree program”.
I believe startup culture is the starting point for problem discovery, its importance, effects and impacts . . This leads to a good feel on planning , design and  integration of multiple components to build a system End to end, a very good exercise for every engineering student.
Remember startups didn't appear in the 21st century.  We had many startups from the sixties onwards. Most NGOs were startups. Look at how the restaurant scene in bangalore has changed. Darshini  was a great move towards simplification of workflow. Home delivery existed in the seventies,  the dabba system is an old one. It taught us decentralisation and collaboration .  
So I used many techniques borrowed from small industries. It was a good and novel experience and learning.
Greetings
Dks
11/12/24, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 565

As I got involved in many transformation projects , i was learning a lot of new concepts and new realizations. Let me look at some of them. 
My first question to myself was - is the top management serious about the project?
 I would say that most top managements were interested in the project and some were pretty serious, some were less involved, some were more involved. Let me give examples . In the case of setting up CET cell, the government was serious about reforming the admission system . The minister, secretary, and TAP members were serious about the project . They were all involved and some to a serious level. They are keen that this should succeed. They are clear of the hurdles of the opposition from DTE and hence set up a new organization called CET cell.                               In the second case, the government was equally serious and interested and involved with the big mahithisindhu program. The CM and EM reviewed the program once in a while. The secretary education was involved in vendor selections and budget allocations and approval processes. The commissioner of public instruction was totally committed to the program and spent a considerable amount of time on the formulation of project principles, plans and approaches in the initial stages. He streamlined the approval paths and processes. While we didn't set up a new organization for this program , we delinked the administration from DSERT and got approvals directly from the commissioner. We removed operations from the education department and moved into a totally outsourced mode with proper review and approval processes. So these commitments , involvements led towards the success at the first stage. 
The third one was the Jindal steels. It was clear from the beginning that management was keen on the digital process and supported it. There were no hurdles or oppositions. 
Let us look at the case of ERP for the department of space next. Here more than interest, it is the strong will of the top management that prevailed. DoS is a big department with many organizations . So they had no way of ensuring uniformity in administration in different units. So they asked the question - is there a central computerised answer and heard about ERP. But existing packages didn't meet their requirements and their restrictions on technology use like the oracle database system  was  not available to them. So they discussed and felt that they should develop an inventory house system for administration and finance. It met with strong resistance from some senior IT persons in some units. They said it can’t be done. But some seniors in a few units like SHAR, were prepared to build it. It gave a big opportunity for IT department to showcase and motivate their people. Three units came forward to build it. DoS headquarters supported it. So both Mr Prabhakaran, additional secretary and Dr Madhavan Nair , director ,VSSC decided to go ahead. I was roped in. That was a strong commitment. They were involved in some reviews. 
Let me look at the fourth example - banks . This is a mixed bag. CMDs and EDs had short tenures.  So their commitments varied from deep interest to total non interest. Secondly, banks had a lot of GMs , with no ownership or responsibility to IT, and they were involved in decision making. Convincing some was easy, but it was difficult with others. Fortunately IT had committed officers and so we managed the activities successfully, but not to my professional expectations and satisfaction .
Greetings
Dks
12/12/24, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 566

Normally, we think that technology is in the front seat, but I found that the  culture of the organization and people are  taking a front seat.  In some organizations whose names  I don't want to mention, jealousy and fear had destroyed the project. Particularly, ERP is not welcomed by employees. They felt it was too much work, and were afraid that they wouldn't be able to learn new ways of doing the job and may even lose the job.Even IISc had hiccups for decades  in computerising administration and accounts and selecting a good ERP. It struggled for decades due to the egos , overconfidence and wrong beliefs of the deciding committee. The committee was not deciding ,but vacillating in arriving at a decision for decades and only recently accepted a professional approach and implemented SAP .   So navigation is to be done carefully. 
Corruption is another factor that  I didn't want to mention. Whenever we had a vendors meeting to discuss technology or whenever we selected a vendor, there was curiosity in many people. Even the class 4 staff and drivers try to get information from me. While I admired their interest, I felt that they were exceeding the limit. Similarly , many in the office will ask me to find out our decisions . It was a tough decision . You can’t say no, but you need to be diplomatic about your replies. I normally give vague answers in these cases. 

My next biggest problem was vendor management.  I had interactions with thousands of vendors for  about four decades. This needed many skills.  Vendor management  has many subcomponents like vendor selections, team synergies, implementation management etc.  It is a field with lots of mines strewn around. Any one may explode.  Before I discuss the process for vendor selections, let me look at some normally encountered situations. 
Assess the vendor . Is he saying the truth? Mostly not. So the question is how does one distill the truth from the vendors’ proposals and discussions? We need to devise other mechanisms. My knowledge here came in handy . I used Google search and literature search for knowing the current trends. Today we have much better evaluation and rating of vendors. Also many vendors slowly learnt that trust is more important for long term stability and gains and decided to leave the short term gimmicks.  So many vendors became  frank and open .
Assess the cooperation of the vendor?
This also is decided based on past history. So new vendors with very little experience were not normally encouraged unless supported by some established and reputed companies.
Assess the capabilities of the vendor? It is my most difficult task. I had to go with past experiences and some reputations. I had difficulties with the capabilities of implementation teams in many organizations, because we don't know them apriori.  Remember implementations come later after vendor selections. It is one's luck to get a set of competent team with a good leader and necessary skills. Most vendor teams learnt at the expense of the organization . Many team leaders didn't have domain skills in banking. Sometimes no team member had domain knowledge or knowledge at a low level. Though  the vendor company has a great reputation , the team's capabilities are doubtful. I had fights with teams from TCS,Wipro , Infosys, HCL , Lasersoft and many others. This is not easy - a tough human relations job. I feel unhappy about these interactions with such vendor teams even now. I didn't see much professionalism in their approach or actions .
more in the next.
Greetings 
Dks.
13/12/24, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 567
My next problem:
How can we predict vendor synergy in advance? We can't. We go by vendor reputation and past experiences. 
How do we decide whether the relationships and synergy between vendor and the IT team will be balanced and smooth? 
This is a great topic for research . Most think the relationships between the organization and the IT company were good. It depends on the perceptions of top management and the two leaders - IT department head and project lead from the vendor company. Their  expectations were different , understandings were different and even levels were different with the organizational IT head being a very senior IT and domain expert whereas the vendor's project lead will be a moderate person with unknown domain skills. These lead to friction and fights . This may have effects on the success of the project. In some cases , the organizations are powerful and try to browbeat the vendor. In some cases, the vendor shows his technical superiority and browbeat the organization.  This relationship is never a smooth one. There will definitely be many points of conflict and the maturity needed on both sides to resolve these is quite high. Proper documentation and understanding were difficult sometimes. One shows one's power , not realizations at that time. As I said , I had encountered these fractions hundreds of times in the course of the implementation.  
The only case where i found a good vendor organization relationship was in the core banking implementation for  Indian bank by TCS. It was a good example of relationships. Mr Jayaramakrishnan , senior management person from TCS ironed out minor differences. That worked very well. 
Similarly, there was a good rapport between PNB housing finance GM Mr Nitant Desai and 3i Infotech MD Mr Manivannan and it smoothened the frictions. One reason this succeeded was the decision taking powers at a senior level compared to a junior person sent as project lead. Project leads worry only about optimising their job and not about satisfying the customer. Project leads are normally technical people with minimal interpersonal skills and empowerment for decision making. 
I think this concept of a relationship manager is a good idea and leads towards a greater chance of success. It reduces work area tension and increases the harmony between both teams . It gives a realistic assessment of progress of the project. I am surprised why this concept is not a part of every  project activity. 
But a careful selection of a relationship manager by an IT or services company is important. The role should be well defined, the person should be familiar with his organization - I found that some relationship managers  of a bank were ignorant of rules- and should have decision making powers. The manager should be mature . 
My encounters with vendors were the hardest and highly unpleasant ones. I didn't like it ,because 
I met vendors for different purposes - prebid, sales presentations, technical issues in operations , implementations , performance issues , price negotiations etc. 
The vendors behaviours were very different. Some were good and nice, some morose, some particularly from multinational companies were indifferent. 
Many vendors were good , but many were incompetent.
 I found it strange that a particular vendor - let me name it because that was a unique case, Lasersoft- had a phenomenal superiority complex and arrogance that he felt that  he was doing us  a favour , not a service. It was difficult to talk to him. I was puzzled as to why  the bank tolerated his behaviour. Fortunately,  I didn't find this kind of attitude in others.
That concludes my discussion on some aspects for the success of a project. 
Greetings 
Dks
14/12/24, 5:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 568
“As we stand at this turning point, we are faced with a choice—a choice between a future of unparalleled possibility and a future of unimaginable peril. The fate of humanity hangs in the balance, and the decisions we make in the coming years and decades will determine whether we rise to the challenge of these technologies or fall victim to their dangers.
But in this moment of uncertainty, one thing is certain: the age of advanced technology is upon us, and we must be ready to face its challenges head-on.”
Written by AI
Suleyman.      Coming wave

Let us move back to the DoS Project on building an inhouse ERP called COWAA.  
As I said earlier, it was a bold decision by DoS. It was opposed by many IT heads,  but the management had no options. 
Fortunately , the entire activity was well planned. They decided on the areas and functions to be computerised. Details about rules and practices were collected and codified. Then a project lead , Dr Srinivasa Rao and his deputy were appointed. Similarly, leads for each area were also identified. Each group built its teams from different centres. Most team members were motivated and excited. We got a separate V and V team from VSSC. Videoconferencing systems were established for communications . 
We decided to meet once a month physically at SHAR, Sriharikota.  So I visited SHAR once every month. It became a regular activity for me. This went on for three plus years. 
We went through the steps systematically and ironed out issues by anticipating them and listing them. 
The project ran smoothly. Mr Prabhakaran,  Additional Secretary, DoS had a review meeting and I was there with him. I also met him a few times to apprise the progress of work. Two officers in charge of IT at headquarters - Mr Ramani and Mr Dominic were also  part of my review team . All these helped in the smooth running of the project. The groups employed NIIT trainees on databases - Sybase trained persons- to assist them. But I insisted that they should stick to pure SQL and avoid special features of Sybase so that the transfer to Oracle would be smooth. 
It went off smoothly. Most work was done . Fortunately there were no transfers of people , so we had no manpower or team issues. 
The project showed good progress, but went  almost the full way. When more than 90% was complete , the teams lost interest , work slowed down. So they weren't keen on installing the software, training users and running the software in a systematic way. They were happy to develop the software but not enthusiastic to run it. It was run and was found useful in resolving issues of uniformity. 
So that was a long journey of big software development involving many teams from many centres, a great experiment and lots of learning.    
Greetings 
Dks
15/12/24, 5:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 569
“Awareness is not a school quiz that can be passed by reading and memorizing some facts. It’s a journey that is fueled by our intent to be open, honest, and free. It begins when we realize that our comprehension is in fact limited, it continues when we follow that realization with a desire to break free of artificial constraints,and it unfolds when we move forward toward knowing our vast potential. From those precious moments on, a new course can be charted as we discover worlds that had been previously hidden or obscured.”
Deitch.       Elevate

This DoS Project revealed some important components for successful implementation of a project. 
IT governance- while IT governance wasn't understood by most IT people, this project employed many  good governance principles employed by DOS, a culture built by Prof Dhawan . So there were some starting points like well articulated goal and objectives,  organised teams, detailed plans , good preparedness, top management commitment and involvement,  project leadership,  organizational culture and cohesion , reviews, feedbacks, participation, openness and transparency, good communications, motivation, team training, coordinated teamwork,good  business and IT synergy ,etc. That gave us a great start without hurdles. We added additional governance on progress reviews, coding standards, time and effort estimation, time management, target setting, separate V and V team , collective understanding , decision making, good and quick conflict resolutions, adhering to standards  etc. 
The total process of software development was well defined. This meant we were in CMMI level 3. 
We didn't start with a waterfall model. I never liked its rigidity. While we had all rules and existing procedures collected and codified, we didn't prepare an SRS. We went through a detailed design, allowing for additional rules and functions by modularisation. 
Other success factors were- deep familiarity and understanding of the tasks being handled , normally called domain knowledge; good leaderships; adequacy of capital and other resources ; operational synergies etc. 
We didn't worry about security very much as it was only for use by staff , not others. The Internet and web are yet to become popular. 
Documentation was good. V and V team wanted documents. 
 It is a major project with external constraints , but very well executed. 
Let me turn my attention in another direction -  my involvement and work for TEQIP.  
TEQIP is a World Bank program designed to improve the quality of engineering programs in our engineering colleges, both state and central institutions as well as a few private colleges. The World Bank had been supporting a number of programs to improve the quality of engineering education at different levels in the country for more than 25 years and I was involved in them either in buying equipment or in improving skills or developing curriculum and writing textbooks or conducting short term programs.  But TEQIP was different. It learnt from past problems and looked for a holistic , focussed and integrated approach to improving quality.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
16/12/24, 3:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 570
“They seemed to operate in a parallel universe, one defined by devotion to a shared set of principles, a worldview, which gave them citizenship in a tiny intellectual village. Call it Singletonville, a very select group of men and women who understood, among other things, that:
• Capital allocation is a CEO’s most important job.
• What counts in the long run is the increase in per share value, not overall growth or size.
• Cash flow, not reported earnings, is what determines longterm value.
• Decentralized organizations release entrepreneurial energy and keep both costs and “rancor” down.
• Independent thinking is essential to long-term success, and interactions with outside advisers (Wall Street, the press, etc.) can be distracting and time-consuming.
• Sometimes the best investment opportunity is your own stock.
• With acquisitions, patience is a virtue . . . as is occasional boldness.”
Outsiders.            William  Thorndyke

TEQIP was started in 2002. It was well thought out, comprehensive and focused. About 180 institutions were selected based on proposals submitted by institutions . While the institutions chosen were mostly those funded by either the central government or the state government, a few private engineering colleges were included in the list. While in  karnataka,  all aided institutions and two government/ university colleges were chosen . In addition, about six  private colleges were also selected. Karnataka didn't have any objections to private institutions becoming a part of the TEQIP program whereas most states objected to the participation of  private colleges with Tamilnadu being a vociferous objector. Tamilnadu didn't even allow aided institutions to apply for TEQIP. 
 There was a focus on funding and activities. The main focus was research. So funding was focused on encouraging research work . Institutions were given large amounts of funds for purchase of equipment for starting research in new areas. We decided to equip all institutions with a good computer centre and hundreds of PCs plus some sets of applications software packages. That will strengthen computer based projects and research and employability in IT will increase.  We funded institutions for modernising their labs and class rooms . Some funding was given for constructions but restricted to less than 10% of the total allocation. 
There were some conditions to be met by  both governments and institutions like a good governance mechanism, a governing board , and the state governments to facilitate the grant of autonomy to these institutions. We wanted the faculty to register for PhD and to guide others for PhD. Financial assistance was given for PhD work and for publications in research journals. 
Institutions were encouraged to run several short term courses covering new areas in depth so that faculty knowledge increases and they can teach new courses. While there was an exchange program for faculties , it wasn't popular.
There was also a focus on social and community aspects. Many institutions did some interesting work. For example, SDM,Dharwad, conducted a welding course to jail inmates so that the trainees will have a job once they are out of jail. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
17/12/24, 5:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 571
Before we start looking at the TEQIP program, it is appropriate to look at the engineering education scene in India in detail. This will give us an exposure on the education scene.
Our engineering education was marginal till the fifties just like our university education. With the five year plans focusing on industries and construction of dams , the government understood the importance of Swami Vivekananda and JN Tata’s concerns of the availability of an adequate number of trained engineers to design, build, maintain and operate engineering constructions, industries , and power supply. The demand for engineers was high and increasing every year at a steady rate.
So, the second five year plan focused on setting up several engineering colleges to provide a supply of engineers to state PWDs ,central PWD, CPWC, state  electricity boards and public and private sector industries. The central government devised an examination system through UPSC to select engineers to run central engineering services, railways ,and telecommunications.  The entire system was robust for that time and the curriculum was relevant. 
Engineering curriculum in the fifties and sixties focused on a good dose of general engineering principles and a reasonable amount of specialised disciplines. There was an emphasis on engineering design, and practices. Sciences and humanities had a less role.  This worked well till 1980. 
Fortunately, the central took a very impactful step in the sixties - to set up IITs with foreign collaboration. This gave a benchmark to our engineering colleges on what should be a standard education. IIT s played a big role in producing highly focused, intelligent and active set of graduates who became our ambassadors in many parts of the world. IIT s became beacons for our engineering education standards ,though somewhat misleading from reality. 
The sixties saw the emergence of engineering research in IISc and many CSIR labs set up by the government.  Defence also set up some major DRDO labs like aeronautical development establishment,  electronics and radar development establishment,  gas turbine research, defence electronics research lab etc. These two groups created a base for applications research in india. Manufacturing was also strengthened through the establishment of a large number of public sector units . So we created a reasonably balanced engineering ecosystem.  
By the late sixties and early  seventies ,we saw the first set of major changes - the modernization of electrical engineering from machines focus to systems focus , the arrival of control systems as a major part of electrical engineering , the introduction of analysis and optimisation necessitating the larger focus to mathematics , and a shift to theory. So, the emphasis on operations and practices were reduced. Mathematics became a major component of engineering. Electrical engineering diversified into power systems and control systems in addition to machines. Let us continue this further.
More in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
18/12/24, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 572

The period of mid sixties saw the arrival of a major, highly impacting and  new area or discipline - electronics. Most institutions started teaching a few electronics circuits courses for electrical engineering students from the mid sixties onwards.
But by the seventies,  electronics found a lot of applications in industries and the telecom sector. We also saw changes happening quickly - from vacuum tubes to transistors and then to ICs. 
IISc realised these needs much early , started electrical engineering in 1909, the first institution to start a strong electrical program in the country and almost contemporary in the world. IISc also is the first to set up a communications engineering department in 1948, almost contemporary to major universities in US and UK and a major department of Aeronautics. IISc maintained its contemporary approach to engineering through its strong PG and research programs in cutting edge areas. So it became a torch bearer of engineering in India- both on the utilities and industry side and on the academic teachers generation side.  Many  students graduated from our  PG courses  and found a teaching job in several engineering colleges across India. Quite a good number also went abroad for PhD programs. Many joined electrical utilities, civil aviation,  HAL, BEL , and many other industries . It was a good dispersal of trained talents across many sectors. This happens even now . IITs story is a bit mixed. Many undergraduates moved to IIMs and joined the management stream . But most graduate students helped the many sectors in the country - education and industries. 
Some engineering colleges started a new discipline called electrical communications engineering in the seventies. It gave a new direction to our thinking and actions.
The eighties saw the next explosion in engineering with the arrival of computers, PCs, programming, software, algorithms and data processing . This opened up almost infinite opportunities for work in these many areas. It also integrated many disciplines through applications and functional integration and automation. 
In the late  eighties, we saw the arrival of IT- information technology  which provided a large opportunity for employment. Both CS and IT became major departments from an employment  perspective. 
While the government allowed the setting up of private colleges in the sixties itself, only karnataka took advantage and allowed setting up of many colleges. Till the eighties, quality in a traditional sense was maintained - motivated students eager to learn, motivated teachers eager to learn and teach, reasonable infrastructure etc. Examinations were understood to be the only indicator  of quality. There was only one metric then - the number of students who passed the exams.
There was no research focus, no industry focus, no modernization focus , no publication focus, only a good traditional teaching focus. This continued to a large extent till the arrival of the 21st century. 
While the eighties and nineties saw a quantitative improvement, quality lagged behind. Universities didn't pay attention to the engineering discipline. So many states started setting up separate technical universities in order to focus on engineering. This converted these new universities into big examination centres. It took decades for us to catch up on current trends in many areas. But we took the opportunities provided by the IT sector to increase the students intake by first allowing the setting up of a large number of private engineering colleges. That gave a big lead to our country to take a global top position in IT services.
Greetings
Dks
19/12/24, 3:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 573
“Wolf and Bruhn had to convince the medical establishment to think about health and heart attacks in an entirely new way: they had to get them to realize that they wouldn't be able to understand why someone was healthy if all they did was think about an individual's personal choices or actions in isolation. They had to look beyond the individual. They had to understand the culture he or she was a part of, and who their friends and families were, and what town their families came from. They had to appreciate the idea that the values of the world we inhabit and the people we surround ourselves with have a profound effect on who we are.”
Outliers    Gladwell

Some comments.
Mr Joshi
“History of change  , very well explained  Thanks n Regards”

Prof P Raja
“Excellent Historic consolidation on our engineering education sir. Thanks sir.”

Ramanathan 
“Makes happy reading to trace the smooth transition and swift adaptation to emerging technology by our learning centres.”

Thanks for the above comments. Glad that many of you  read my posts.

Let me continue with my discussions on engineering education in India. 
Many reforms were initiated by the government of India like setting up regional engineering colleges and upgrading them to NITs, introducing an attractive quality improvement program leading to ME and PhD degrees in some great institutions for teachers of engineering colleges, teacher training programs etc. . ISTE was conducting a number of faculty knowledge improvement programs in several institutions. CSIR and UGC gave scholarships for PG and PhD programs . IISc gave scholarships to all admitted ME and PhD students , part of the expenditure met from internal grants.
AICTE was set up to ensure uniform measures for quality and to speed up establishment of new colleges and new disciplines.  It helped in creating a set of norms for quality- teacher Students ratio, qualifications, library books and journals, computer facilities, classrooms, class sizes, access to the institution, campus area and facilities etc. AICTE ensured that these norms were followed by all institutions.  The biggest advantages were the permissions given to start new programs and new institutions and increased intakes. This helped in a quick scaling up of new areas like computer science, IT etc. The ministry of human resources also gave funds to a large number of institutions for modernising equipments, and starting and strengthening thrust areas. It helped many institutions. 
So, to sum up,  we found the following gaps in 2000.
1.low to nil research activity in most institutions with focus on teaching.
2.poor lab facilities and computer facilities
3.low level of research journals access 
4.rigid and dated curriculum
5.low level of academic and governance autonomy
6. Low level of networking between institutions - no resource sharing.
7.faculty improvements were not taken up on a big scale. 
Let us return to TEQIP in the next post.

Greetings
Dks
20/12/24, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 574
“The demand for new skills is spreading rapidly across all sectors. Not long ago, the need for new skills was concentrated in the tech sector. However, the spread of the demand for new skills is transforming industries and sectors, rendering some skills virtually ubiquitous. In 2011, for instance, there were 294,000 job posts seeking people with data analysis skills in only 17 occupations; 10 years later, 1.2 million such jobs were posted in 81 occupations. Many of the skills are spreading to existing jobs, where workers have to learn and apply them, but the spread is also happening in new occupations created by these evolving skills.”
Skills powered organization.   Ravin Jesuthasan ,Tanuj kapilashrami

We saw the gaps in our engineering education.  So we have doubts on whether we can improve our education. The confirmation is provided by the following positive aspects of our education. 
1.Our education system is very resilient.  It accepts changes. It adapts to the changes when forced. Our government keeps pushing changes and forcing them to adapt for their survival. The latest example of government is the NEP. It doesn't get implemented fully. There is confusion and opposition. Still,  there is a lot of  hope to make changes. 
2.We inadvertently moved into new disciplines fast enough to provide a large human power to power the IT sector. Both large scale privatization and adaption of CS and IT disciplines pushed us and our country forward. Contrast this with the sciences and mathematics education scene in India.  We are nowhere near a critical level in bio and nano sciences. Same is true with medical education . The PG programs in medicine  are restricted to a few candidates. 
3. There are a good number of institutions running post graduate programs in engineering.  
 TEQIP addressed some of the gaps. 
Let me look at one area of focus: to modernize the curriculum. Our existing curriculum is dated ,not modern, rigid with a fixed set of courses . It didn't give opportunities for students to choose their basket of courses of interest to them. Labs were routine with old equipment with no possibility of experimentation and innovation. So the curriculum drew our first attention.  We wanted all institutions to move from their existing rigid ,no electives curriculum to a credit based curriculum with many electives and a continuous evaluation by internal faculty.  I played a big role in developing a  complete structure for a credit based curriculum with complete details on various aspects like subareas, core , electives, credit values, in semester evaluation,  grades and grading, final exam evaluation, project work etc, in an exclusive workshop for senior faculty of all participating institutions in karnataka. This needed autonomy away from the rigidity of universities.  It was a great success. All institutions set up a curriculum committee and built a new credit based curriculum. They agreed after a lot of discussions on internal evaluation. Trust on faculty was established by this process. These were remarkable achievements. These were major reforms. 
Let me look at our current scene in the 21st century later. 

Good governance mechanisms for TEQIP were set up at both national level and at state level institutions. I again gave a lead talk on governance to functionaries of all participating institutions on governance aspects. The national level institution was called NPIU - national program implementation unit. Dr R N Mathur was the officer in charge of NPIU. He did a remarkable job of ensuring that the goals are met. He devised many review methods to achieve the goals. Persuasion, formal reviews , slight threats were used to get support from state governments to achieve the objectives of the program. We became good friends. He is running an NGO called EQUATE.
Similarly, the  states were asked to set up a separate SPIU with  autonomous powers in decision making and away from the  administrative red tape of the DTE office. These new organizational structures speeded up funds transfers, purchases approvals , travel approvals, honorarium approvals etc. It created a new structure for governance. Rules and regulations were established for purchases, funds transfers, accounting and audit procedures. A well oiled review mechanism was set up. It worked well and TEQIP achieved a very high degree of success. Almost all institutions got several benefits from this program.
Greetings 
Dks
21/12/24, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 575

Mr Nagaraja has a query:
“Gaps found in 2000 is really disappointing and disturbing. What is the present status regarding these gaps? Can you please throw some light on this sir.? Thanks.
With regards.”
My response
The gaps remain. 
We wake up at some intervals and take some steps and go to sleep. My biggest worry is the curriculum thinking as it is happening now.  Our curriculum thinking by faculty is in the  20th century state, not the  21st century approaches. This needs to change. 
Recently I was in SDM Dharwad and Prof Vasudev Parvati and Biradar raised questions on the curriculum relating to AI program and its impact on IT and CS. I then spent more than an hour discussing the aspects of curriculum thinking with their faculty. There were a number of queries from the faculty. So let me explain in detail the various aspects for the benefit of many faculty in this group. 

The 21st century saw many trends and it reversed many principles of the 20th century. We shifted from job focus to skills and tools focus and from single skills requirements to multiskills requirements. Lots of jobs were in AI agents integration with the IT applications of businesses. Most Indian companies are shifting to AI. Secondly , 80% of jobs are in data analytics. These two dominate the job scene. Then there are many jobs on architecture and software design, cloud management and integration. Our curriculum should be in that direction.
The Major differences between 20th and 21st century are:
The 20th century built a monolithic , rigid organization and moved towards a big enterprise. The 21st century built   a startup culture, a distributed, flexible and integrated organization. 
The 20th century focused on a rigid highly centralised governance with powers concentrated at the highest level. It was a vertical organization. The 21st century moved towards a flexible  horizontal organization with many teams empowered with responsibilities and decision making powers.
The 20th century saw a slow pace of technology developments ,but the 21st century saw a rapid pace of developments of many technologies leading to a convergence approach in applications. Technology use became complex.Technology absorption was fast.
The 20th century viewed engineering from an industry perspective and ignored the customers. The 21st century is people centric with many technologies like mobile, social media, data commerce, payments, crowdsourcing, cloud , AI reaching people at affordable or low costs. This is a big change. Developments were driven by people. 
The 20th century saw a slow rate of technology Application. The 21st century saw a global reach of  business, more scope for applications , and a faster growth of technology uses. Multiple  Technologies like XPUs, processors, IOT, sensors, analytics etc  got embedded into systems .
The 20th century believed in a structured approach for developing a system. Detailed  Planning, complete specification of requirements, risk aversion were all part of the century and our curriculum focuses on these aspects. It wanted to mass produce good quality products at lower costs. But the 21st century understood the failure of businesses due to disruptive innovations and  moved towards a new set of approaches - a flexible and adjustable strategy planning, a shared vision, flexible management without rigid rules, incremental planning, pilots and experimentation, continuous innovation, understanding customer experiences, risk management and not aversion, etc.
While the 20th century ignored the customers, the 21st century went for a customer first approach and kept customers as a part of their processes. Processes became flexible. The concept of professionalism got changed. Changes were effected faster.
The 20th century focused on functions and the 21st century focuses  on data. Decisions are based on data. 
Automation was mostly at the process control level in the 20th century. But digital and AI dominate and pervade in all sectors in the 21st century.  Automation has reached every aspect of a process ,plant or service with robotics,  drones and AI agents playing a big role in almost all aspects. Human AI joint collaborations and actions are the most dominant areas of research and development 
We understood that the term skills meant some simple skills and our tools were more mechanical in the 20th century.  But now , the skills were many and tools were mostly computer based. There are lakhs of tools. So assembly in manufacturing In the 20th century was based on putting together mechanical parts or  electrical parts. But now it is integration of hundreds of software and AI tools in a system.
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
22/12/24, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 576

We saw the changes that happened in the 21st century by discarding many 20th century practices. Next, let us see what is a view of the world in the 21st century.
The world is going the VUCA way.
1 Volatile- changing with the arrival of many  new technologies . We can't live on the “ business as usual”  philosophy. We need to adapt to the changes in our personal life and professional work. So adaptation is essential for survival. So futuristic vision with predictions using AI is essential. We can't live in the past. 
This changes our views of engineering.  We need continuous adaptation. so systems should use agile , flexible processes, not rigid and not centralised. We want incremental and continuous innovation to keep pace with volatility.  Connectivity to the extended enterprise including stakeholders, other businesses, customers, and feedback have  become part of engineering. Organizations need a startup mindset,  not a rigid set of rules, roles and processes. Job requirements are changing . Skills and tools competency , architecting and designing capabilities are essential for new jobs. AI application skills are important for the survival of employees and organizations  Many traditional jobs will vanish. Multi Skilling is a requirement in today's world. New skilling during our lifetime many times is another requirement. 
2.Uncertain - more of randomness, no more deterministic Systems. Statistics play a big role here, not mathematics. It is not just modeling . We need to transform our businesses and industries. Engineering should integrate multiple technologies with agile manufacturing ,services and user demands dynamically.  Techniques like digital twins, AI twins will  come to the front for problem solving. The entire approach to problem modeling and solutions will see frequent changes and additions.
3.Complex and dynamic - many technologies - IOT, data analytics, cloud, AI, 5G and mobiles, crowd sourcing etc-  are put together to create a complex system. Systems scale up fast , reach the entire world and change - metamorphize- dynamically. Systems will be integrated with hundreds of processors, communications, instrumentation and connections to millions of people and devices. So New thinking, new approaches and new methods are needed. We move from centralised and rigid control to distributed , federated and coordinated  control. The word ‘glocal ‘ has a new meaning for engineering. Architecting an engineering system becomes a major and critical activity. It should be amenable for changes.Integration becomes dominant. Designs and architectures needed to be strengthened. Our engineering should shift from problem solving in the small to problem solving in the large- real life problems. Look at systems as an integration of interdisciplinary subsystems , networked and interconnected. Go beyond disciplines.
4.Ambiguous - so we need futuristic vision. We need to look for multiple solutions, not a single solution.
So what does the curriculum in the 21st century should look like? It is a multilayered, multi skills focused one. 
Let us get one view of a 21st century curriculum in the next post. 
Welcome comments. I seek your views .
Greetings
Dks
23/12/24, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 577
We need to understand the following about today's ecosystem based on my previous posts.
Jobs are changing towards multiple skills. Roles are not important.  Integration is important.
Transformation and changes are other important factors to be considered in developing an engineering curriculum.
Complexity is a part of our engineering life. Build a curriculum based on complexity. Architect a solution . Data is dominant .
AI is changing a lot of our ways of working and our actions. AI is becoming an integral part of many sectors relevant to us. Focus is on large systems with applications. AI affects us.
India - particularly the industries , and many business practices , agriculture, health and education sectors - is living mostly on 20th century principles and is slowly moving into the 21st century concepts. The emergence of startups and focus on AI are good evidences for our catching up the 21st century concepts. Our digital public infrastructure is a mature one with cloud, aadhaar, UPI, wallets,ecommerce, 5G mobile usage, etc. Our engineering curriculum should reflect this.
While basic engineering principles remain valid, there are changes in the way we conceive, architect , design , build and operate an engineering system. We are talking of lakhs of smart microgrids of electricity, automated and driverless cars, precision agriculture , reachable health care, mechanical industries in industry 5.0 framework, resources conservation , recycling and reuse etc. Our curriculum should reflect this. 
So it is not enough just to tweak the curriculum . We need to transform our curriculum.
An important and essential first step in curriculum development is to change the mindset of the faculty.  There is a well established culture and strong set of beliefs with our teaching fraternity.  Let me look at these beliefs and changes needed on some of our beliefs.
Whenever we look at a problem, we ask three questions- why? What ? and how?.
So far we looked at why - why we need to reimagine our engineering curriculum. Several changes between the 20th and 21st centuries have made curricular redesign mandatory. I am writing these posts to reach at least some academics in our group who can reimagine their curriculum, particularly those in autonomous institutions. That is my motivation. 
We need to look at the question -  what is the curriculum?
I will start with a description of engineering in the 21st century. 
Engineering today is a complex multi dimensional ecosystem. It interconnects and impacts many other systems like businesses, environment ,  nature , economy, and people. 
Let us discuss the characteristics of engineering in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
24/12/24, 4:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 578
Let us sum up the characteristics of today's engineering .
Engineering in the fifties and sixties concentrated on a device or machine or building /roads etc. Design and practices were prominent in our curriculum.  Jobs were mostly in the machines or buildings or substation areas . Systems approach was unknown. 
By seventies, electrical engineering had a combination of devices and power systems. Systems became dominant in electrical engineering,  but mechanical and civil concentrated on design , analysis and practices.  Some interdisciplinary components like controls, instrumentation and electronics were introduced in electrical and mechanical engineering. Civil looked at the analysis of large structures. 
By eighties, it was the introduction of computers and programming in all disciplines. Large and realistic problem solving became a part of some curriculum.
Robotics was a  topic of importance for mechanical engineering  and it led to an interdisciplinary area called mechatronics. 
Now we will see the impact of data,IOT and AI in our curriculum. We can't ignore these anymore. It will be unfortunate to stay with the current curriculum.
Characteristics of engineering today:
Engineering deals with a complex network of systems , and technologies.  It impacts many other entities like people, economy and nature. So it needs an integrated systems view.
Engineering is more human focused and applications and data focused. Engineering concepts find applications in many domains and sectors like health, hotels, agriculture, finance, urban systems , education . Engineering is now an inclusive discipline. 
Engineering uses new problem modeling and solving techniques like agentic AI.
Engineering is connected to many entities  like people , both operating and consuming  people, logistics, banks, suppliers, purchases, etc. 
Engineering systems are composed of many systems like processes,sensors,  controls,  communications,  computers etc. 
Engineering has many requirements like reliability,  user experiences, cost reductions, higher quality , reuse ,personalisation, fault tolerance,   safety , security, business continuity etc.
Engineering has many stages like analysis, designs, technologies selections, integration, testing, operations , repair, replacements and upgrades etc. 
Engineering needs architecting,  optimization, impact analysis and transformation.


What Is the Status of Engineering in India today ?
It is a highly diverse situation.
Some units are following 21st century principles like digital, horizontal organization, rapid technologies adaptation,  AI oriented , continuous innovation . Tata steel is a good example. Most industries have embarked on digitalization. 

But many also  stay with the  20th century principles of vertical organization, rigid rules based procedures and processes, highly planned and centralised entities. 
Digital usage varies from minimal to maximal levels. Most banks are internetworked, have automated transactions, have centralised databases, use chatbots, mobile apps and the web . Most customer faced commercial and business activities have been digitalised. Ecommerce use is strong and reaches almost the entire country. It handles most commodities and is growing rapidly. 
Unfortunately,  some organizations are primitive like our water, power, gas , and transport utilities. Technology hasn't reached them to a meaningful  level. 
Some like construction,  health and education use technologies moderately.  The use of technologies  is mostly for management purposes. But some processes like medical equipment use modern concepts.  
We need to focus our attention on utilities, urban systems, water resources, cyber security, agriculture and go for new approaches to design .
Governments have built good digital infrastructures. 
IT services are strong in India.  
Startups are booming. 
AI is absorbed by industries and businesses. Its use is pervasive. 
Many types of data analytics are used by many industries .
So, in conclusion, it is a mixed bag. We live with many mixed sets of  principles . The best example is the 1970 saying “ Boeing planes and bullock carts are both used in India”. We live in harmony with old and new . So any education should have a lot of options to choose from
Greetings
Dks
25/12/24, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 579
Let us look at a major  issue to be understood and resolved before going in to discuss curriculum .

 Our engineering faculty beliefs enshrined in us for more than 70 years are
Disciplines like civil, mechanical, electrical , electronics,computers etc are very important. Faculty are highly possessive about their discipline. Their thinking is totally internalized to their discipline. Some look at interdisciplinary ideas, but still the view is from their internal discipline point of view.  Almost everyone identifies himself or herself with their departments - like i am a mechanical engineer or civil engineer etc. This restricts us to a highly or totally internalised views of their domain knowledge and expertise. This internalised view ignores the external world to a large extent or it provides a partial understanding of the external world. It excludes many new developments . It doesn't give us  a holistic view. We need to change this by creating a holistic engineering view first - we should define engineering first, its components, its entities and functions , its linkages to our environment,  society, governance , manufacturing, services, people- . Such an engineering exploration is the first course in engineering to be taught. One of the essential learnings of 21st century is:

A completely internalized view practiced by us in the 20th century makes us a frog in the well. We need to create a complete externalities based  view. This is based on two premises: 
Everything is changing in the world. Nothing is constant forever. Only the time constants  are different.  Today, changes are happening fast. A generation of people see several changes in their lifetime like we saw electricity's impact on us first , followed by electronics changing our communications and entertainment, and then followed by computers and mobiles enhancing our capabilities and now the new change, impact of AI on us. So we need to understand and accept this.
The second premise is that there is a strong Connectivity in many entities and domains in the world. Physics taught us to look at matter - an entity focus. But it moved into interconnections like energy, waves, cosmos thereby making us understand the importance of relationships and connectedness. Engineering embedded mathematics into its modeling capabilities first and then embedded chips into products and will embed AI agents into products. Today's world is a highly connected one in multiple ways - through energy, consumption, communications, real time interactions, data/ information/ command transfers, functional interconnections. So our focus should shift from entities to relationships. 
We need to accept these two principles and change our one directional internalised views. We need to accept the fact that engineering has no borders. We created disciplines like civil , mechanical etc for our convenience. We need a different set of views on engineering.  
Engineering needs multiple skills. 
What are those skills?
People skills 
Design skills
Problem solving skills
Architecting and integration skills
Transformation skills.
We need to create a new startup mindset - select a real life problem, study it, analyse it, select technologies for its solution, get feedbacks , implement solutions, patent it - all these running through three years of the engineering course , providing an end to end views .  Focus should be on problem generation, innovation, problem solving ,large systems thinking etc. 
We will be seeing a very major transformation in the coming days. Let us see that in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
26/12/24, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 580

Let me explain the big transformation that has started now. 
Engineering initially mechanized a function like rotation or lighting. But a task was done by a person like a mechanic using a lathe to produce a threaded cylinder. 
Later functions were handled by software. That is the world we are living in today. 
Tasks needed work flow and dataflow. There were separate mechanisms like APIs or SOA to handle this. It is not a highly scalable and flexible approach. We need a better method of going up a layer beyond the functional layer. That is the job layer. A job may have many tasks to be done to complete the work. So agents will allow us to concentrate and automate from the task layer upwards. It is a big change in problem solving methods.
 Today , We are seeing a tsunami . Move away functions, move away software, here is a group of  AI agents doing your jobs.
Agent is not a new concept. It existed in client server architecture itself. But with AI, it is becoming a powerful super tools organizer. Functions and tools will be underneath the agents, built by AI  and covered by the agents. Agents will talk to other agents to perform a job. Agents will perform  reasoning activities and will take decisions . Agents will consult with humans for specific situations. 
 Another ten years, the world will be populated with millions of agents . It will replace your apps. Are we prepared for these  millions of AI agents? We should start building agents .
Our engineering should move to a new agent concept and era. so get ready for that. 
Like the initial concept of operating systems design by many layered approach, we need to think of complex problem handling also as a multi-layered activity. These layers can be at one level or many levels. A complex problem may have many sub problems - like process system, user system, business system , IT system, data system,  AI system,  etc with many interconnections . Each subproblem may have many sub problems again with many levels of interconnections. We can decompose each such subsystems into many units , each unit doing many jobs, each job having many tasks and each task having many functions.  We can also visualise several activities as strategy, planning, design ,constructions,  Integration and operations. So we end up with a multi networked, multilayered, multi level system. Agents will handle each layer. That can be a simple look of future engineering systems. These engineering systems can be a big manufacturing unit, a construction unit, a public utility like water, power, gas, transport etc. , a services unit like logistics, health, banks ,IT services etc, or a commerce unit or an urban ecosystem management , or a governance unit etc.
Let us construct a multilayered curriculum in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
27/12/24, 5:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 581


Now, let me provide the layers for a balanced 21st century curriculum according to my thinking. 
Engineering principles relevant to the disciplines . This is well developed, but needs pruning and tuning.
Society and People focus-  there is a big shift of engineering from industry focus to people focus with people empowered by SMAC . Humans are intertwined with engineering systems like power ,water, gas utilities, transportation, smart city, smart and precision agriculture, and digital health systems. primacy is on cyber physical systems . 
          People use highly interactive and easy       to use devices and generate a lot of data on social media and ecommerce.  human way of solving problems and  processes for actions and decisions 
Problem discovery takes place at the people and society end  and not so much at the industry end . So start with a social projects and surveys program.
Data focus- big data and analytics are the main oils for industries and businesses. About 80% of jobs are estimated in this area. 
        4.   Design focus- designs and architecture of systems, technologies, data, applications and integration play a crucial role in building and  operating engineering systems. Design is considered from many critical success factors like reliability, real time responses, correctness, self repairing systems, adaptive systems, 
5. Problem solving layer - we need to look at many types of problem solving techniques. Use digital twins, heuristics , multi objective Optimization etc. 
6. Relevant engineering systems layer - security, safety, reliability, user experience based dashboards and apps, engineering subsystems , IOT based instrumentation, etc
7. Technology, integration layer - architecture,  convergence, integration principles, software architecture, 
8. Applications layer - applications in many sectors like health, education, governance, small and medium enterprises, fintech, agriculture, city management - water, drainage, power, transport, safety, security , data generation etc. Use AI techniques .
9.  Practices layer - how do we operate, fault detection and rectification, data collection, continuity of operations and services etc. Use data and social media .
10.  Support disciplines layer -materials,  mathematics, optimization, software development, mobile apps, statistics, ML, computers, IoT,  blockchain, process control , etc. 
11. AI and applications
We need to structure courses based on the above principles and layers. We need to reduce the overwhelming attention to theory , components and machines.

Use these layers to build the courses and curriculum.

Greetings 
Dks
27/12/24, 8:03 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Very well said Sir! Lot of deep thinking!!
28/12/24, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 582
“American society proclaims a commitment to individual freedom and autonomy and sees choice as a hallmark of liberty – the more choice, the more freedom. But too much choice isn’t so liberating. In fact, it can be paralyzing. Take charge of your decision-making by evaluating your recent choices. How much effort did you expend – in time, research or emotional stress – on each step of the process? How much did that benefit your results? Identify categories of decisions for which you could use simple rules of thumb to minimize the cognitive and psychological burden. You may find you don’t need to make some choices at all.
Schwartz.     Paradox of choice.

Some comments 
Dr Sanjay Chitnis:
“Very well said Sir! Lot of deep thinking!!”

Mr PV Joshi:
“Good Morning. Sir , you have summed the essence of modern times with hope and positivity. Grateful to you for upgrading my knowledge. Thanks n regards”

“Resp. Sir,
Well brought out facts on Engineering education in India.”
C.Subramanian

Prof P Raja: 
“Excellent Historic consolidation on our engineering education sir. Thanks sir.”



Dr RN Mathur
“Sir,
Nameskar!
Progress of technology highly depends on political support. I will be happy if you mention who were the great political leaders who provided support and boost to technology during your journey.

Regards 

Dr RN Mathur”
Your comments, Dr Mathur is interesting and thought provoking. It takes me back to look at my life and the interactions  with academics, CEOs , industrialists, bankers,administrators and politicians. Some are part of this group.
 It was a great journey started with a lot of struggles and disappointments In the beginning - definitely not for a weak minded person- . But it moved on from the eighties to a very exciting , interesting and useful journey till now. The experiences were great. The learnings were many. There were many challenges and a lot of opportunities and excitements.

Let me start with my struggles In the sixties and seventies.
Only a few loonies in India believed that Computer science will be a major developing area in the world. Most felt that it wouldn't survive. So I was a loner at iisc for about two decades and had a lot of trouble convincing other faculty about my work. 
It was  a surprise that most scientists and engineers didn't accept IT as a major influencer in the system. Even Prof Dhawan realised it only by 1970 . I had a long struggle to sell computers to most academics. While some are indifferent- most scientists were- , some were scornful and considered it inferior and some felt it a good tool for numerical problem solving. There were some who refused to believe in numerical methods and felt analytical solutions are the only answer. I was in an environment of strong control theorists and analytical Mathematicians. I was happy that Dr Devanathan appreciated my work and helped me. We built a strong mathematical and computational foundation for my thesis. But he died just after i submitted my thesis. He didn't see my thesis. I don't know what way I would have chosen , had he been alive . Till 1970, I was the only one working on major computer problems and till 1975, I was the only one teaching CS subjects. While seniors refused to believe that CS will be a major area, junior academics had a vague and mild curiosity in this area. That is the status not only in IISc  but also in most parts of India. Even though we started the automation masters program in 1973 itself, the program allowed only two CS courses . Slowly I started teaching courses on data structures, systems programming, operating systems  and computing systems. The school looked at a separate ME program in computer science only past the 1980s period . We started BE in CSE only in the nineties after a lot of fights. My stay at Manchester and IIT Bombay were exceptions. I had great interactions with many faculty members in several other disciplines. They all accepted CS as a separate discipline. Incidentally , I played a major role in introducing independent BTech and MTech in computer science and engineering in IIT Bombay  in 1978. 

Till 1980, there were only three  groups with whom I could talk about computer science. 
One was definitely TIFR , but my interactions were restricted here to a few people. But there was a good group there. The second was NAL, where I started my computer journey. NAL under Dr Sankar was working on numerical algorithms. I could talk to Mr Janardhan and Mr Panchapakesan there in addition to Dr Sankar. The third was HAL. Here I could talk to people on programming and hardware. Mr Desikan, Mr Ramakrishnan and Mr Venkatasubramanian were the hardware guys and Mr Venkateswara Rao,  Mr Kantaraj were programming persons. I used to talk to all these people. 
I will continue in the next one.
Greetings
Dks
28/12/24, 4:34 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Sir, very inter4esting article on Engineering curriculum: https://www.msn.com/en-in/entertainment/news/most-iitians-diverge-from-their-field-why-we-must-rethink-branch-based-admissions/ar-AA1wzhE2?ocid=entnewsntp&pc=LCTS&cvid=6f4914b578d34b4db9f705b5300fbd69&ei=29
29/12/24, 5:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 583
Let me continue my response to Dr Mathur's query. 
Past 1985, my professional life transformed into a large stream of activities in addition to my commitments to IISc , academics and research. I improved computer science teaching in many universities and colleges. I got involved in computerization, networking , and IT related activities in many organizations.  That continues till now. 

As regards political support, i got a lot of support from senior administrators, CMDs more than politicians. The best support I got was from Mr SM Krishna . I knew him as a minister, deputy CM, CM and external affairs minister. He was a thorough professional, never interfered in my advice and activities. 
I also got a lot of support from both Mr Ramakrishna Hegde and Mr Veerappa Moily, both chief ministers of karnataka. Ramakrishna Hegde was a reforms oriented person, encouraged new ideas and alternate thinking. I met Mr Abdul Nazeer Sab, a great minister who installed hand pumps in most villages in a mission mode. His work was impressive.  
Mr J H Patel ,who was also a  CM ,was a wise and witty person. He gave me a lot of respect . While giving me a shawl in a public recognition function organized by karnataka land army , he said with wit that the shawl is heavy and won't be of use to me.
I should remember three  education ministers - Mr Veerappa Moily,  Mr Viswanath and Mr Govinda Gowda . They  gave me respect and freedom and supported my activities. Mr Veerappa Moily used to discuss many things with me. His perceptions were pretty good.
Mr Viswanath helped us to run the mahithi sindhu program without political interference at any point. 
When I was involved with the starting of KSCST,  I interacted with Mr M Y Ghorpade, the finance minister then. Later , when I was KSCST secretary, I worked with Mrs Nafeeza Fazal, science and technology minister . She wasn't aware of S and T or even administration.  She listened to me carefully. Actually I started my discussions with her during the first meeting with a hurt statement that I will resign as secretary if she wants. She understood that I didn't like her attitude and talk. She changed immediately. She learnt very fast the many facets of S and T administration and was very helpful to us.
Our only interference occurred during Mr Bangarappa's regime. 
When I was in the state government,  I met many ministers and interacted with them.
I also met several MPs , MLAs  and MLCs and had smooth and meaningful interactions with them. 
I had met some union ministers ,but my interactions were with officers and Secretaries of various departments and agencies and not with any minister. 
That is my story of political interactions. My interactions brought me in contact with thousands of officers in many departments, organizations, institutions, colleges, universities, banks and industries at many levels and many kinds - serious researchers, sales managers, development engineers, faculty members, government officers, bankers, utilities officers, etc. I got  immense benefits from my association with all these thousands of people and also thousands of students. Almost all had a belief and trust in me and my advice and help. I cherish those memories. 
Even at this age I am able to interact with young faculty and students . That was due to my associations, friendships and trust. 
Greetings
Dks
30/12/24, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 584
My interactions with people from different cultures and different professions got me a lot of new outlooks and understandings. Mr Uday Singh appreciates this:

“👍 that’s why you enjoy such high personal equity and your high networth is simply your your high network!  
I have known you for decades and learnt several things and derived immense assistance in my working career and also in start ups. Even now I shall soon bother you with SoME ( School of Meaningful experiences). Uday”

Thanks Uday. I appreciate our great interactions, and our friendships. I cherish our friendship. As someone said ,” experience the experiences.” Secondly, listen to all and treat all as equal. I feel strongly that there are many genuinely great leaders amongst politicians. I have written about Mr Byrappaji ,MLA for three times , but didn't have any money , such  an honest person. I had  also posted before  about Mr Hegde Kaduve, MLA for several terms, who lived in a room in a hotel . When people wanted to present him a car , he requested them to buy an ambulance so that all can use it.  I had met Mr Narahari , MLC for many terms, who dedicated his life to improving education and teaching .  I had met many MLAs and MPs who were simple and serious about their job. 
You will see later my interactions with staff in many colleges and their motivation and pride and genuine interest in their institutions which I didn't find in many faculty members. They are all unsung heroes. 
I think that  we should reflect after each meeting, each action and each interaction. It enhances meaning in life.  It takes our life forward. It gives satisfaction. 
I considered each lecture to students in the same way. I might have delivered thousands of lectures to students and hundreds to professionals and researchers and hundreds of public talks. I always reflected after each talk. Most times, I used to feel happy , a happiness not easy to express. 
I found some faculty unhappy to go to a class room and lecture to the students . They had a different experience. I had two  colleagues who didn't want to talk in a conference . They avoided conferences even those organised by the department.  Many faculty members , whom I had met on occasions ,didn't know how to deliver a talk or a lecture. It is an art , a well structured methodology that needs to be absorbed and practiced. Even students didn't have talking practices. I consider every talk to have a purpose , a structure and felt that it should be possible to derive a few learnings from every talk. 
Similarly there were many occasions in my IT projects life. When I saw  the IT or power systems working, I was thrilled. 
In conclusion , I had a greatly satisfying series of experiences in my  life. Sure I had some disappointments from a few academic discussions. They are my sad reflections. 
But I moved forward. 
All my experiences were meaningful learning. 
Thanks.
Greetings
Dks
31/12/24, 5:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 585
“The only force more ruthless and cynical than the business of big politics is the politics of big business. “
“Civilisation, after all, is defined by what we forbid, more than what we permit.”
“Friendship is something that gets harder to understand, every damn year of my life. Friendship is like a kind of algebra test that nobody passes. In my worst moods, I think the best you can say is that a friend is anyone you don’t despise.”
Gregory David Roberts.      Shantaram

I thank all those who read my posts and make value addition through their comments. 

Let me return to my involvement with the world bank's  TEQIP program during the period 2000 to 2015. 
We saw one reform under TEQIP- curricular aspects. 
The second aspect is the review process and almost 360-degree feedbacks. It helped us to understand the difficulties in the system and steer the college or institution towards better academics.  
My involvement was at a  deep level. At the national level, I  was involved in deciding on performance factors . At karnataka level, my involvements were more detailed and in depth. I will discuss this later.
I felt that I can influence changes in academics, equipment purchases , research and social concerns. 
I also felt that most institutions were keen to improve their academic standing. They went on to inculcate research culture and publications culture seriously. 
I visited several institutions several times in many parts of India.  My biggest opportunity was meeting thousands of people - some several times - , and discussing with them on various aspects. It was very revealing. It opened my mind to one most important aspect of our academic system. It is what I want to call as diffidence amongst the faculty and a big divide, a false pride  and ignorance  in academic thinking and a great degree of vacuuosness  amongst the faculty and management . The institutions ignored and neglected the staff particularly the lab staff. Managements used office staff mostly for spying. All these worried me and worries me even now. I feel that we don't find academic freedom in most institutions. Instead ,there was an academic fear. I can give a lot of examples why faculty keep their mouth shut as they are not sure of the  responses and reactions from the managements. There were some institutions which were exceptions. Most NITs had a good academic ambience and freedom, but also academic diffidence. 
Dr Mathur built  a good review mechanism. I became a performance auditor and mentor for India  and karnataka. I was an auditor for several karnataka colleges like SIT, SSIT, SDMCET, and Many NITs . I was also a mentor for three karnataka colleges and a few NITs. 
This meant that I had to visit about 12 institutions twice a year. 
We visited , had discussions with faculty and students . Our discussions were revealing. 
It opened my mind to the realities that was there in the country. 
Let me discuss some encounters and their effects in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
31/12/24, 5:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: 2024 ends by midnight today. We will welcome 2025 .
Let us be happy , healthy . 
Let us pray that there be all-round  peace, prosperity, happiness , achievements and satisfaction to all in the universe. Let us wish
Let us think good things.
Let good things happen.
Let all get good and positive and helping and harmonious living.
Lokas Samastha  sukhino 
Bhavantu.
Om Shanti Shanti  Shanti 
Greetings.
Dks
01/01/25, 5:34 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, wishing you back using your thoughts written as a poem by ChatGPT: 
Let us be joyful, healthy, and kind,  
With peace and prosperity in heart and mind.  
May happiness bloom and harmony reign,  
Achievements abound, free from pain.  

Let thoughts be noble, actions pure,  
A life of goodness for all, we ensure.  
"Lokaḥ samastāḥ sukhino bhavantu," we say,  
Om Shanti, Shanti, Shanti—every day.
01/01/25, 5:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 586
“Life can be wonderful as well as terrible, and we shall increasingly have the power to make life good.  Look at the ways of making life wonderful and follow them .  Happiness depends on our attitude. Happiness comes from giving, from being friendly with others, and from being kind to all. Anger and shouting don't help, instead We lose friends. ”


Let me discuss some incidents that happened during our discussions. 
In one engineering college , students said that faculty do not know how to speak English. The faculty of the same college said that students lack English communications capabilities. I discussed this lack of language skills with the management and introduced courses and training program to both groups. The improvements were visible in two years. So after two years, when I met the staff, one member asked me, “ you have focused on English training for faculty and students. We also want to acquire language skills”. I felt that it was a genuine request and recommended to the management to conduct training programs on language skills to all employees. 
Similarly the employees said that the management does not permit them to attend evening degree programs while they encourage faculty to pursue ME and PhD degrees. When I raised it to the management several times , they were not agreeable to the suggestion of permitting the staff to go for an evening BE program. I found most staff were having better articulation skills than the faculty. Generally I found that staff were more loyal and more realistic and more satisfied with their work than the faculty.
In general , in most institutions I visited , I saw some amount of dissatisfaction among faculty  for some reasons. One reason surprised me and showed our class consciousness clearly. In one of the NITs, during my interactions with faculty, many said that there is a discrimination between a regular professor and a CAS professor. CAS means Career advancement scheme. They said that even the wives of professors taunted the wives of CAS professors. This shows the deep entrenchment of class - equivalent to caste- amoungst academics in NITs. This meant that such programs aimed to motivate faculty had demotivated them. They are not able to look at this in a dispassionate manner and appreciate the effort of the government in introducing the scheme. 
In another institution, students said that they were happy that their teachers were using ppts. But the faculty copied ppt from some foreign university. They didn't read the ppt before projecting. It had details of a class test in a particular room in a particular Building. The faculty didn't mask this information.  It showed that no effort was put by the faculty to prepare the ppts.
I came across many such incidents. 
Let us continue further in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
01/01/25, 7:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: I use new year to ruminate on my past years actions. I got a habit with email for the past 35 years . That is to remember my friends ,associates and others through this Greetings. 
New year doesn't bring happiness. It is upto us to make life wonderful and happy through positive and kindly thinking. Wish everyone a best year. 
Don't worry, be happy.
Greetings. Dks
02/01/25, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 587
“The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind.”
—John Maynard Keynes

During my TEQIP interactions in another institution ,an NIT,  I asked the faculty ,” why have  the curriculum , contents and books  remained constant for 50 years?”
I got a shocking answer from a senior professor that the program has been running for 50 years and that is proof enough that it has withstood the test of time and so the program is good. 
He didn't look at changes happening during these years. It showed the deep divide in the thinking by faculty in  traditional disciplines as compared to the faculty in  the changing disciplines like electrical, electronics, computers etc. 
It made me think ,” what should be the primary qualities of a good academic apart from in-depth discipline  knowledge and teaching ?”
Our selection process for a faculty member looks at the educational and experiential credentials and the interview mostly explores the knowledge level of a person. I usually ask the question - what will you do in the coming five years?. The answers were disappointing . Most say primitive things and say they will do more research. They didn't have an outward look at what is happening in the world and didn't have any curiosity. The primary qualities that I considered essential in an academic  are - 
1.look outside not just inside.  Outside views are essential for survival of all. That is the mistake millions of people in their life, business and professions do and that is the main reason businesses die. 
2. know the past and present,analyse and pick the important aspects to remember.
3. look at the happenings in the world not just in your area but in a general perspectives 
Understand the broad realities of engineering, society,  nature , people . Professional life does not begin and end with knowledge in a discipline. Knowledge in multiple areas and multiple views is essential. Know the proverb - master of one and jack of all trades.
4.Realise that the world is changing faster. You can’t gain a path by looking at seniors in the profession.
5. Ask questions about the future directions 
And 
6. decide on your work to tune in with the changes and reality . Adjust and adapt to the transformations. 
That is the bare minimum set of  qualities expected from a good academic. That will remove the stagnation in our education system. But I found that most faculty don't like changes and don't want to change. They stay in the past. It is worrisome that even now many live in the 20th century , but students are in the 21st century. We need a mindset change here. 
Appreciate comments.
Greetings 
Dks
03/01/25, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 588
“What is the true driver of disruption? Thought leadership. Yes, thought leadership may manifest itself by using technology, but technology is usually just the tool of disruption, not the core driver.”
James Deitch.   Disruptive fintech

Let me post some comments :
As usual, Rukmani Anantharaman has commented in detail about her learnings.
“Dear Anna, 
Namaskarams.
Thanks a lot for your daily posts and New Year wishes.I warmly reciprocate your wishes.
Your valuable insights in the field of education are deeply  fascinating.
Although I am not able to comprehend many of the technical details regarding Computer and  Engineering education, my interest in your posts  is sustained because they are interspersed with personal experiences and interactions with academicians, students ,bureaucrats , technocrats,politicians  etc.( Your mention about discrimination amongst academics brought to my mind the Medical - Non Medical bias which supposedly existed  in a few sections in JIPMER in the olden days ).
We cannot but marvel at  your amazing perspectives on various practical issues and brilliant ways of implementation of your ideas in arriving at clear  solutions. Your  profound knowledge, attention to details,excellent planning skills , perseverance and astuteness in bringing diverse groups on board  to achieve seemingly impossible goals,  all contribute greatly to the success of your various missions. Your life journey serves as a great source of inspiration. Thanks for sharing .
Wish you a very happy New Year.
Namaskarams.”
Thanks a lot for your encouragement. 

Mr Uday Singh comments on my posts:
“A very happy new year to you DK from all of us in this group who have benefited enormously through your posts during last 3 years. May you remain healthy, passionate and happy and continue to share your knowledge. Uday.”
Thanks. Your words are highly encouraging. I am surprised that I have been using WhatsApp to post information on various aspects like engineering,  education, hinduism, my life paths etc for about eight years and most of you read my posts and some comment on it . It is remarkable. 
I got many comments  requesting me to continue my posts. Thanks.

Mr Giri comments on academics. 
“Good morning sir, I totally agree with you. I have been in IAB for few institutions and what I have seen is faculty not willing to learn new things and teach students in a much more interactive way. I strongly recommend "Make it to learn it"  approach to teaching. Again, these are my view points.”
My response
I can't take a brush and sweep all academics. The incident I wrote about deals with one individual . Most academics I know are very good, committed and keen to learn. 
I should discuss two changes managed by faculty in the 1980s and 1990s.
A very large number of faculty picked up microprocessors, learnt most details and ran microprocessors courses in all colleges. Several wrote books also. Many became proficient in microprocessor applications and most students did project work using microprocessors.  
The second is a bigger transformation I saw amongst the faculty. The late eighties and early nineties saw most colleges starting computer science programs without any CS trained faculty to run the program. Again I saw thousands of faculty members in other disciplines rising to the occasion and they took the challenges head on, learnt many CS subjects and taught them. It was a first hand experience for me. I have trained many such faculty on CS subjects. Could we have waited to get trained teachers before starting the CS and later the IS programs ? My answer is no. The reason why India became the leader of IT services in the world is due to lakhs of graduates we produced just at that time. If we waited, we would have missed these opportunities. I played a major role in giving AICTE approvals for CS and IS programs in most colleges. My hunch worked well for the country. 
There are many academics who are part of this group and show keen interest in learning. I also mentioned in my comments the deep divide between the circuit disciplines and traditional ones. Even there, mechanical engineering is changing with controls and robotics as part of the curriculum. I am still amazed at a team of 14 students building a go-kart at PESCE, Mandya and several students working on electrical mobility. Both Prof Ravindra and  Prof  Dinesh Prabhu, who were responsible for these projects are members of this group. 
I am glad you gave me the opportunity to clarify my posts and my opinions.
Thanks.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
04/01/25, 5:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 589
“In a set of articles written in the early 1980s, Leontief made one of the most infamous claims in modern economic thought. What technological progress had done to horses, he said, it would eventually do to human beings as well: drive us out of work. What cars and tractors were to them, he thought, computers and robots would be to us.”
“Today, the world is gripped again by Leontief’s fear. In the United States, 30 percent of workers now believe their jobs are likely to be replaced by robots and computers in their lifetime. “

Mr Joshi has commented on my interactions:
“Thanks Sir , your interactions with variety of people are very interesting. Reading such writing makes me feel , how everyone behaves relevantly or irrelevantely. Human nature. 
Happy new Year 
Regards”
My response
I want to bring out the following factors for success in life and profession.
Most engineers , both professionals and academics, think that engineering is to deal with technologies and their applications. They feel that engineering has nothing to do with people and interactions with many persons. Their interactions are mostly one-sided.i had seen most civil and electrical engineers treating contractors without respect. I wanted to show that people relations is an essential part of engineering and cannot be ignored. It should find a place in our curriculum. 
The 21st century is seeing more people involvement  in technologies and business through their feedbacks, social media posts etc. Mobile technology is dominating businesses today . People influence the success or failure of a business. Feedbacks play a very important role. That change is not understood by most. They are living in the past. 
Secondly , I want to discuss scale. Most businesses , banks , utilities, have expanded and become big. 
What do we mean by scale? 
Is it business as usual but with more branches and more Customers? 
Hindustan Lever scaled up with a large number of distributors and delivery points and massive and attractive advertisements. So it succeeded with a good strategy and a good reach to customers. 
But let me look at another example - banks.
Post nationalisation,  banks added a lot of branches . But they continued with the business as usual approach ,that is to ignore customers. I was IT advisor to Corporation bank and had an account with a branch in Malleswaram.  Whenever I went there, the staff were found gossiping and ignoring customers. A retired ED of the Corporation bank had to call the GM IT to resolve a problem as the branch ignored him. I had similar problems with other banks’ branches also. Fortunately ,net banking and mobile banking help us now. 
Private Banks are no better. My  relationship manager doesn't know anything and hence wasn't useful. 
Greetings
Dks
05/01/25, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 590

You may be wondering ,” why did I talk about people oriented engineering and scaling in the last post?”
There are reasons - 
The urgency to know  about life, living, and purposes and avoidance principles - no slavery
To be aware of current situations and consequently to change our life.
I am worried that we will miss the 21st century bus. Already we missed two decades of 21st century thinking. We stayed happily with  the 20th century ideas. This is not just for academics -  Don't think that only academics should carry the burden and say what they want, but I don't care , I will stay where I am.” This will not work now. All are affected. All of us should be prepared for the changes AI wil usher in and adapt to the situation. 
The next tsunami of AI agents is on us now. It will create major turbulence and disasters in our life. We need to urgently move from the complacent life to anticipate these turbulences , be prepared for them and make changes in our life. 
That was my concern. Also cosmetic changes ,like the way banks scaled up by ignoring people , will not be enough. 
Maybe , we should look at the vedic period organization of society, life and villages and see whether we can look back at a spiritual approach to life, - frugal and minimal and natural living, increased consciousness, harmony, Sharing, peace, ahimsa, love all , avoid hatred and jealousy, avoid competition, comparison, consumerism, etc. 
That is what sanatana dharma is, not what the intellectuals or pseudo intellectuals proclaim. Unfortunately, we discarded vedic living and moved first to the Puranic way of living and   later to the British way of living. We are aping the west happily calling the frugal livers as fools and misers. Consumption dominates our life today. Buy more cars, you can’t drive them in bangalore roads, you don’t have garages to keep the car ,keep it on the road and worry about theft. Think whether such a living , such a rat race is worth? How do we reverse and move away from the race? 
Is living for a job and being a slave to the company, as propounded by Narayana Murthy,  a correct thing to do? 
Are we aware of burnouts.
Last do we understand life and purposes/ meaning of life, balances in life?
Any thoughts? Please comment 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
06/01/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 591
“As we stand at this turning point, we are faced with a choice—a choice between a future of unparalleled possibility and a future of unimaginable peril. The fate of humanity hangs in the balance, and the decisions we make in the coming years and decades will determine whether we rise to the challenge of these technologies or fall victim to their dangers.
But in this moment of uncertainty, one thing is certain: the age of advanced technology is upon us, and we must be ready to face its challenges head-on.”
AI generated text
Mustafa Suleyman.     Coming wave.

I posed a number of questions in yesterday's post .Let me continue my discussions to look at some aspects. I hope these open our minds and make us question ourselves , to contemplate and get answers. We may get many answers , appropriate to our life. 
One aspect is clear: The  vedic kind of living slows down the  impacts of technology . When you slow down your living and work with others closely as a society and depend on local resources mostly  , you learn from the mistakes of the fast living urban , modern jetset and choose wisely the technologies you need. You don’t become a slave of quick commerce, meganopolis , slums. consumerism, wealth accumulation, aspirations, data, and AI. 
Gandhi talked about the sanatana  way of living and practiced it in Sabarmati ashram.  Well, in 1960 , that was what Schumakar reinvented as intermediate technology and some Indians called it appropriate technology. But we didn't listen. Nehru was going at full throttle on the soviet way of living leading to disasters. 
But today may be a turning point for us. We need to relearn - how to live a purposeful life?
 So a wise and careful living as well as a totally new paradigm need to be evolved by us to suit us and not copy the western models. Stop following the west and  start leading them through a different lifestyle. 
Life and living in an ever-changing world is very serious and needs our attention.  Politicians , intellectuals will not be of any use or guidance. Don't look at them. Look inward. 
Hence I thought a cautious post is desirable. I feel we need a changed mindset, a changed way of living - definitely not business as usual.
We need clarity on life and living. Life is multidimensional. We have personal life, family life, professional life, societal life and life with friends etc. So We talk about balancing amongst these multiple lives. That is what many people are talking about. Most talk of family work balance. But balancing is a complex act and most of us lead a one sided life missing the balance. 
First, let us ask: who are we?
Understand this:We are prisoners of our beliefs, habits, our limited knowledge, our myopic perceptions,our egos, our biases, our limitations and constraints, our dependencies, our deficiencies, our ignorance, our laziness, our limited skill sets etc. With all these, technology adds another dimension of slavery. We are bound by all these and live in a limited, ignorant,  small and error prone world. We need to unshackle the bonds and enlarge our vision . 
So start with becoming aware of yourself, mindful of activities, removal of biases, ego, fear, emotions, constraints, capable of alternative and genuine thinking or imagining , and learn to become insightful . All these are conscious and continuous activities. 
But there are two other important components in our life. One is the spiritual or religious part. It is an important part for many Indians.  It gives us peace of mind and satisfaction. The other aspect is the learning or Jnana part. It is considered important. But most ignore this. 
Now we need another aspect in life - adjustments and adaptations to transformations. We were doing it in a small and planned way till now - like changing jobs, houses, cities etc. But we need more changes in our lifestyles, our thinking, emotions, beliefs , behaviours and attitudes . 
In addition , life may be viewed as a series of decisions and actions. 
Lastly ,we need a purpose or a goal. It can be related to oneself, or family or society , or our professions or to our religion or country or nature . We may have multiple goals also. One common goal that some follow is to help others or advice and educate friends and associates. 
So a good understanding and 360 °view of life in a modified form is essential and we need to evolve a different paradigm of living. 
Greetings
Dks
07/01/25, 5:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 592
“Rather, the path to ongoing enlightenment begins by loosening our death grip on our opinions, beliefs, and ingrained behaviors. When we let go, we create space to let in new insights and observations. As we explore we expand, and we become more aware. Letting go and opening up allows us to confront repressed feelings and fears, and allows love and compassion to flourish. That’s why one person’s “answer” might offer little insight to someone else.”

“The common reality for most people seems to be that awakening comes bit by bit with every elevation of attitude, awareness, and understanding.”
“While the road to greater awareness begins with the deceptively simple decision to be more open and openly curious, there is one particular practice that I highly recommend as you proceed with this book and go through your daily life. Pay attention to how you react to the various stimuli you encounter.
Every idea, every person, and every interaction provides an opportunity to observe how we react to life in its infinite expressions.”
Joseph Deitch.       Elevate.   
   
Mr Joshi, as usual, is very prompt in giving very perceptive comments:
“Hello, Excellent food for thought. Do engineers concentrate only on application and/or  applied   technology. There need to be social philosophers to elevate human wisdom .  The purpose of life should not be forgotten by becoming workaholic. Engineers may argue that there work is their life philosophy  That's an argument  . Inventing or discovering " Who am I ?" should be purpose of life .  My view .”
My response
Thanks for giving me a chance to sum up my recent posts. As Mrs Rukmani , my cousin, mentioned ,I mix up my experiences with certain principles or concepts. We need to segregate and understand them. I understand it is tough. So let me clarify in brief what I tried to say. 
Clarifications: I think I mixed three  totally separate themes in the recent posts. This has led to confusion. 
First I talked about the developments and impacts of engineering. I agree with you that humanised engineering as opposed to industry oriented engineering is an urgent requirement for today. We need to include human engineering as an important component of the engineering profession and the  engineering curriculum. 
Secondly, I developed a new approach to  the curriculum development and the role of faculty in meeting the changing scene today. 
I felt that faculty should be forward looking and outward looking to survive. But I didn't explain clearly there that the six rules proposed by me are applicable to all and they are the first step to leadership in living. 
Mr Srinivasan ,PNB, expounded on their applicability to all. 
Thirdly , I looked at the pace of developments taking place today particularly AI and their massive attacks on all common people. Then I felt that it is time to relook at our ways of living and the need for paradigm shifts in living. 
So a lot of discussions here are the need of the hour for all people ,not just for engineers or faculty.
 Engineers have a big responsibility to develop ethical models of applications . Teachers have a much greater role to explain the role of a society , the transformations and the pros and cons of applications of AI and adaptations to keep our life going amidst the perils of Pralaya that might happen . 
Common people need to understand the happenings , draw insights from them and lead a purposeful, meaningful and highly conscious life . They should be careful of the many enslavements  that are encircling us. So I said be prepared for the future, become free, look at all options, choose carefully , live consciously. 
I am not criticising anyone here, nor passing value judgments on any one or any group. 
Those were the main focus points of my posts. 
Thanks to Joshi for giving me an opportunity to clarify my recent posts.
I agree with Joshi that all of us should know: 
The purpose of life is not to live to eat, or survive. It is much more. Each should think and identify his or her goals and purposes in life. Upanishads and Shankara give a lot of thoughts and wisdom towards that end.  Shankara talked about “moodamathe. “ in Bhajagovindam. Jnana is essential for all. Viveka  is an important tool for acquiring Jnana.  Shankara talked about more tools in Vivek Chudamani to acquire correct knowledge. 
I repeat that  life is a tough and dynamic balancing activity. Balances change with time in a dynamic manner. 
The main reason behind these posts are the current pace of changes in technologies happening in the past ten to twenty years and our complacent, business as usual attitude and actions. I wanted to caution all of us about the future and request them to come out of this attitude and move forward. 
Fear of AI is not an answer to the problems created by AI. 
Euphoria about AI is equally unacceptable. 
Longer working hours is not a solution. Looking for a paradigm change in life is my suggestion.
Greetings
Dks
08/01/25, 6:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 593
Maxwell Maltz wrote in his groundbreaking book, published in 1960 titled psycho cybernetics,   “It is no exaggeration to say that every human being is hypnotized to some extent either by ideas he has uncritically accepted from others or ideas he has repeated to himself or convinced himself are true.” 
“We don’t put up with having our computers hacked by others, so why cede control of our minds and our very beings to anyone else?”
  Joseph Deitch                     Elevate

Let me continue my discussions on life and living. Rigidity is the main influencer in one's life practices. There is a Tamil proverb:
“If someone doesn't bend by usually years of years of age, will he or she bend while reaching 50 years of age. “
What do i mean by rigidity ?
As we grow up, we pick up many habits, biases, behaviours and beliefs.  Let me call them as baggage that we carry with us all through our life. Rigidity means we don't discard the unwanted or irrational biases and beliefs. That means we don't learn in our life , we don't have an open mind , we don't have viveka- a knowledge of right and wrong, dos and don'ts, good and bad.  
The first ten years of life as a child is crucial in one's mental development.  Good habits , behaviours are important.  But we spend a lot of time only on the  physical development of a child. 
Do we address the mental development? Do we allow a free flow of curiosity  and questioning. A child asks thousands of questions at the age of four. A lot of doubts linger in its mind and it searches for answers. Do we handle these questions effectively and honestly? That is the time to start a child on the path of open and critical mind . Do we do it? That is the period when a child develops an analytical mind , an unbiased thinking mind, a mind without any mental baggage, and that is the time for a child to develop insights. We seem to fail at this stage. Some children who are genetically tuned for critical inquiry start thinking and finding answers. Today's danger is google and its biases. Tomorrow's danger is AI and its biases. We need to address these. Past  Experiences won't help us. We need to create new experiences just like a four year old child. 


Let me return to my journey with TEQIP.  
Other discussions I had in most institutions where I visited as TEQIP auditor or mentor centred around teaching practices. There is a consensus to the use of ppts in teaching. But there were problems :
Most didn't know how to prepare a ppt. I got complaints from students that some ppts had too much information that they couldn't even see it. The utility was gone. I suggested a rule that no ppt should have more than six or seven lines.  Also the use of black color on a white background was recommended. This crowding a ppt with a lot of information came from the practice of ohp transparencies. The transparencies were expensive and we minimized their usage by putting more information in a sheet. I had prepared thousands of ohp sheets for my courses. I used ohp for more than 15 to 20 years. But our teachers never used ohp or ppt. The preparation time for a lecture was minimal for many. But they struggled and improved their teaching. Many were good teachers, and learned new concepts quickly. 
TEQIP focused on research and the achievement here was great. About 4000 faculty registered for PhD by the end of the first phase. This was done through financial incentives . 
TEQIP gave me a lot of opportunities to meet with hundreds of faculty members, thousands of students and staff  in many institutions across the country.   
I was fully involved with TEQIP phase 1 and 2 for ten years.  
Greetings
Dks
09/01/25, 5:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 594
“Intelligent awareness doesn’t stop at the confines of our skin. In fact, it doesn’t stop at all. We are continually getting data from everywhere, both within and without. Obviously, we are biomechanical beings, with arms and legs and supporting infrastructure. We are also chemical beings whose every function involves a sequence of molecular interactions so sensitive and sophisticated that little prescription pills can have a huge impact on us, mentally, physically, and emotionally.
However, we are also energetic entities whose influence and interactions extend well beyond our physical bodies. We generate electromagnetic and other types of energy from every cell, and we receive energy at every moment. We interact on a molecular, atomic, and subatomic level with the world around us—not just those objects in our immediate vicinity, but conceivably all the energy-emitting entities in the universe.”
Deitch.     Elevate 

Let me continue with my decade long association with TEQIP.  
The states of engineering education in karnataka at the beginning of TEQIP were :
1.It was controlled by the university VTU mostly but also Bangalore university and Kuvempu controlled one college each.
2.The curriculum was old and rigid.
3.No college had autonomy. 
4.No research was going on in any college including KREC. Some senior professors in KREC,  who were good and sincere and dispassionate, even argued with me that research is unnecessary.  It surprised me. 
5. True,  most colleges were in a better position in the country . All colleges had started computer science and information technology programs.  A good number of faculty were good and sincere and tried hard to do their best to improve the quality of education and built a good lab . Quite a good number of  faculty were really great.  They want to improve the standards and quality. Most improvements depended on them.  
6. The aided Colleges maintained a good quality and led the engineering education in the state and country.  Private colleges weren't in that league at that time ,but some were serious about improving their quality. That is the reason to include  some  private colleges in TEQIP.  
 7. Some  colleges had started MTech programs. 
So our first major  job was to work for getting autonomy for all TEQIP institutions. Universities didn't want to lose control over these colleges. So a bitter fight was on the cards.
We had an excellent state program implementation unit. Mr Chandrasekhar headed the unit and was very proactive and helpful.  The DTE was also supportive of this program. Education secretary was also very supportive of our suggestions and actions. Even the minister for education supported our efforts.  So in effect the program was a great success in karnataka. 
So we planned well , moved forward towards autonomy . Since the colleges had no exposure, we conducted a one day workshop on autonomy -types of autonomy like academic ,administrative and financial,  functions entrusted to a college, structures and governance mechanisms, curriculum development,  evaluation of students in courses , examination system etc. This program was organized by our new foundation -FAER- with support from SPIU. 
I developed  a complete blue book on curriculum - stressing on flexibility , balancing, credits ,total number of credits,  credit requirements, gpa,  pass criteria,  student's workload,  etc. SPIU conducted two workshops in Orange county. I discussed curriculum,  governance and related structures like academic council etc. It was a big and detailed task and effort from me. 
We also had several raps with colleges to review, advise and assess dedicated progress. 
We had a lot of difficulty in making these colleges autonomous. The major obstacle came from the University.  Mr Kausik Mukerjee, secretary education,  resolved this by piloting a special bill in the assembly. We appraised even the minister on the need for autonomy. The university wanted to retain its hold on the colleges and issued a mandatory guidelines to the colleges. 
Today , the colleges have gained a mature understanding of autonomy and have implemented autonomy responsibly .  It was a great experience for all people and stakeholders. I was part of several academic councils and we broke many myths and beliefs. 
 TEQIP second stage converted SPIU into a facilitation unit - SPFU. I was involved in most activities under SPFU. 
I found that  the TEQIP program was very useful in improving the quality of education. 
I am happy about my  participation in this program. 
Greetings
Dks
10/01/25, 5:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 595
“It seems to me that without understanding the way our minds work, one cannot understand and resolve the very complex problems of living. This understanding cannot come through book knowledge. The mind is, in itself, quite a complex problem. In the very process of understanding one’s own mind, the crisis which each one of us faces in life can perhaps be understood and gone beyond.”
J Krishnamurthy 

Let me continue with TEQIP. 
I got support from many for my activities in TEQIP. Officers of SPIU and later SPFU were very helpful. All principals of colleges and directors of NIT listened to me when I summed up the discussions in my meetings and my suggestions as well as my report. This briefing was a good system. 
Some didn't accept the  comments by the faculty fully  . This was normal. There was only one violent disagreement in NIT Hamirpur. The director told me that his faculty didn't understand my discussions and gave incorrect answers.  He wanted me to redo the exercise of discussions with his faculty. He wanted to talk to his faculty. I saw the fear prevailing amongst the faculty during my meeting with them. I thought that another meeting would be a doctored one and so I rejected the suggestion of the director.  He was upset. He talked to Dr Mathur and requested for another audit . Dr Mathur rejected it. That was my only discard.  Everyone  cooperated with me, appreciated my suggestions. 
Many suggestions were implemented. 
Most students had complaints on two aspects- one is poor teaching and insufficient attention to teaching by teachers.  This was common not only in the colleges but also in NITs. 
The second complaint by students was about the curriculum - it is old , not relevant , rigid etc. Some students complained that teachers didn't know Java and its applications. One student - in 2001- commented that Python was not taught. Many students were aware of the latest technologies but not their teachers.  
The students  appreciated the new equipment and computers bought under TEQIP. They were happy with the modernisation of class rooms.  
As regards the faculty, I didn't see much appreciation from them on the efforts made for improving research and publications as well as the conducting of hundreds of learning programs for them. There was no seriousness with most. But younger faculty appreciated these efforts and opportunities provided to them under TEQIP.  They took advantage of these schemes.
They had no interest in social activities. They thought it to be a hobby. 
I talked about English language improvement before. 
Let me look at a few suggestions. 
I talked about building responsibility in the younger faculty and motivating them. This was implemented in some NITs and a few colleges. 
Even NITs had difficulty in implementing  electives in their curriculum.  In one NIT, I was told most students opted for a few management courses on offer. This created a heavy workload to some faculty and heartburn to others.  I suggested that they should increase electives in each department. Running one or two electives in each department is not correct or enough.  
Most institutions lived for a long time on mandatory courses to be attended by all students without choices.  Faculty were happy with this arrangement. They didn't want to move to a choice based curriculum. This difficulty was experienced by most thousands. 
My second suggestion to the institutions was to allow students to register for other departments courses as electives. This was considered strange . Departments felt their importance will be reduced. 
While all institutions accepted to build a choice based curriculum , their mindset didn't change. They were thinking in terms of a rigid curriculum. Most allowed only two or three electives in their curriculum.  
It took a lot of effort. Let me discuss some changes brought by me in the institutions. 
I felt design concepts  and thinking is important for increasing creativity and team work. So design courses were introduced in some colleges. 
Some institutions introduced more than one project work. 
I was worried about the lab work becoming  routine without experimentation. My efforts borne fruit in BVB with Prof Shetter listening to my anguish. 
I felt programming courses were not effective. Students didn't write large programs.  In an head-on discussion with faculty, I found that faculty were reluctant to implement this suggestion. Even though I explained my practices in the seventies to make my students to design a full assembler as part of my course on systems programming and design a concurrent operating system at a time when computing power available was low. I also told them that the students appreciated this. Still most institutions live on programming in the small.  I didn't succeed in this . 
I will continue this in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
11/01/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 596
“The mind is the only instrument we have, the instrument with which we think, we act, in which we have our being. If we do not understand that mind in operation as it is functioning in each one of us, any problem that we are confronted with will become more complex and more destructive. So it seems to me, to understand one’s mind is the first essential function of all education.
What is our mind, yours and mine?—not according to… someone else. If you do not follow my description of the mind, but actually, while listening to me, observe your own mind in operation, then perhaps it would be profitable and worthwhile to go into the whole question of thought. What is our mind? It is the result, is it not, of climate, of centuries of tradition, the so-called culture, the social and economic influences, the environment, the ideas, the dogmas that society imprints on the mind through religion, through so-called knowledge and superficial information.”
J Krishnamurthy 

Let me ask and answer a question. How did my interest in curriculum start and evolve?
When I was in school , I developed many  habits like  reading books, listening to elders, contemplating for long hours on many topics like engineering, economics, country's freedom struggles etc. I didn't know anything  about freedom or curriculum  But before I finished my schooling, I realised the following:
World is changing a lot. 
Electricity will be a game changer.  Industries are coming up. 
Our economy is struggling. 
Education systems are improving. 
Caste is becoming a very dominant force despite most decrying the caste system as bad. There is a strong anti brahmin sentiment growing in Tamilnadu. 
Idealism was dying  and greed was paving the way for life. 
People were complaining that values are dying. 
But I had no idea how my life will evolve and what I will be. 
I took changes as they appeared,  never thinking about them. 
I had imbibed  some principles and values like frugal  living, truthfulness, honesty and integrity in my dealings, respect for elders, responsible behaviors,  contemplation, analyse before acting or deciding, due diligence,  ownership and Keenness and curiosity  in learning about what is happening and what is new. I learnt many languages - English ,  Hindi and Sanskrit  in addition to Tamil. I knew a little bit of Telugu . 
I don't have principles or opinions on other aspects. I had an open and flexible mind. 
These guided me in my life. 
Actually , I wasn't sure what I should do after the completion of schooling . I was keen on studying further. I was strongly motivated to pursue higher studies.  I had an inclination towards mathematics and engineering.  
It was my uncle who admitted me in PUC in Xaviers college. He was also instrumental in directing my sister's education at Palayamkottai and later in  Madurai.
My desire to go for engineering crystallized at that time. 
When I joined the engineering college , I was told that our engineering course will be a new experiment. It will be a five year program.  The curriculum will be different. We had a very strong mathematical foundation covering several areas of mathematics. Also we had a good two years of general engineering courses. Also more general engineering courses continued till the fourth year. Electronics courses were introduced for the first time. All these made me realise the importance of curriculum in education. 
Later, my encounters with the engineering curriculum really started at  IISc in the year 1969. As I discussed earlier ,I played a significant role in moving the IISc program to a choice based credit system - we called it a unit system. That was a major reform in our curriculum . That wasn't an easy task. It met with many hurdles. We built structures , guidelines and advisories to construct a successful system that is working till now. I was part of every structure and was with the system for a decade. 
Then I chaired committees to build both a graduate program and an undergraduates program in computer science. That was not an easy task. Later I chaired a committee to convert the UG program into a four year integrated ME program. 
That strengthened my involvement in curriculum development.  
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
12/01/25, 5:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 597
“If religion is not about God, then what on earth is it about (for heaven’s sake)? It is about us. It is about manipulating our brains so that we might think, feel, and act in ways that are good for us, both individually and collectively. Religious traditions work like the bow of a violin, playing upon the strings of human nature to produce harmonious relations between individuals and their social and physical environments. Religions have always been about this business of adaptation, and they will always remain so. This is not to say, however, that any particular religious tradition will remain adaptive. Religions sometimes outlive their adaptive utility and occasionally become positive threats to human survival.”
Religion is not about God. Loyal Rue

My interactions with universities , colleges, IITs and NITs were four dimensional.  
The first interaction with colleges in karnataka started in the late seventies with KSCSTs  students projects program. It brought me in contact  with a large number of principals,  and faculty. This relationship continued for several decades and was very useful for all of us. 

The second dimension was giving lectures and even running full courses in the area of computer science. This happened in many states and enlarged my horizon and understanding.  
 The third was curriculum development. We will see more of it .
The fourth was my participation in faculty selections in many colleges, REC/NITs, IITs and universities in many states. Most particularly were happy with my presence in their selection committees.
An awareness of the curriculum for engineering started in the eighties.  As most universities had mostly arts and science faculty and no inhouse engineering faculty , they needed experts to help them in their engineering curriculum development. I was invited by many universities in Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and Andhra states to their board of studies. I also participated in the curriculum process in both REC Trichy and later TCE Madurai. My involvement with TCE started with their board of studies for several years and with their series council. I continue with TCE even now. 
I had a tough time with most of these meetings. As most faculty who participated in these meetings had no knowledge of computer science and as there weren't many CS faculty, they used to fill the curriculum with many electrical and electronics courses. I literally fought in all these meetings. It used to be pretty bad. But I achieved some success in most places. I had to keep in mind their constraints.  So the curriculum was a compromise. I had similar problems in the faculty selections also. It was much worse. In one institution,  they picked a civil engineering ME as a lecturer in the CS department because he knew FORTRAN.  I protested and wasn't invited to the selection committee afterwards.  In an REC,  where I was a regular member of the selection committee,  I was not invited when they wanted to select an instrumentation person as a faculty member in CS. 
So I suffered on both counts.  
Slowly , the system improved. Still , many favoritisms and biases  persisted.  
You may ask me,  why then I got involved with many institutions and universities in their board of studies and in their faculty selections. 
There are two reasons. 
I get requests from many vice chancellors and principals , many are known to me. The requests are genuine and they all wanted to improve the quality of their programs. Many heads of computer science departments also wanted my support to run the board of studies. 
Secondly,  I wanted to help these institutions to grow. They respected my views and  accepted about 80% of my suggestions. I saw definite improvements in these institutions over the years. In addition, I also gave series of lectures in many institutions.  So i saw a positive growth of computer culture in those institutions. 
That gave me immense satisfaction and that was the reason for my continued  participation in these activities 
One of my meaningful and effective contributions happened in KREC in the 1990s. I could shape the curriculum of three programs in three days of work to my satisfaction. All participants accepted my suggestions enthusiastically. None came up with excuses. They were prepared to learn new concepts. It was a great experience for me.  
Another major change that happened was in REC Trichy. It was a very tough task. One member, HoD of computer science in Annamalai  university,  was a power engineer with no knowledge of computer science and he wanted to include many electrical courses in the CS curriculum. I was against it. It led to unpleasant circumstances. Finally I could build a balanced and modern curriculum. 
Similarly ,my stay with the academic council of TCE, Madurai for many decades ,has been encouraging and fruitful.  I cherish my association with my alma mater.  
We reconstructed the CS curriculum in Narsee Monjee institute of management.  Prof R Natarajan arranged this meeting. We developed a methodology of consultations with students and faculty , followed by the preparation of a detailed curricular program to be finalised after discussions with faculty. It was a three day program. It went on very well . It was a meaningful and participatory exercise.  I liked this visit . 
Greetings 
Dks
13/01/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 598
 Mr Aravind comments on religion:
“Very well said Sir, about religion. Religion is regarded by the common man as true, by the wise as false and rulers as useful. Religion is part of the human make-up. It's also part of our cultural and intellectual history. Religion was our first attempt at literature, the texts, our first attempt at cosmology, making sense of where we are in the universe, our first attempt at health care, believing in faith healing, our first attempt at philosophy.  Just as a candle cannot burn without fire, a person cannot live without a spiritual life. One cannot believe in God, unless he believes in himself.”
“For Einstein, "science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind." He told William Hermanns in an interview that "God is a mystery. But a comprehensible mystery. I have nothing but awe when I observe the laws of nature. There are not laws without a lawgiver, but how does this lawgiver look?”
My response
Wonderful. This deserves views from us. We ask the questions- what is religion? Who is god?
There is no universal answer.
When you want to get universal perceptions or views , do we realise that even science doesn’t have universal statements. Most statements were constrained with assumptions like linearity ,non interference etc, simplifications , approximations and conditions. Proof is relative. Even absolutism is not easy to define. So to expect universally acceptable answers for religion or god is not correct. 
Do we have a universally acceptable view of anything in our life? The answer is no. 
Reality itself means different things to different people. Also our view on reality is dynamic , keeps changing. Even our views on engineering have been changing drastically over the years. We have no difficulty in accepting the fact that everything is changing.  
When you accept that we live in a VUCA world , why don't we apply that kind of thinking to religion and God?
There are no single or easy answers to these questions. There are multiple answers , not easily refutable and most are valid and acceptable to groups . 
Each one of us needs to build some level of clarity on religion and God in consonance with the ecosystem and culture one is familiar with and understands  inwardly .
While many say that religion deals with mysteries or unknowns , it is also clear that religion itself is not properly understood by many. Multiple definitions and understandings exist. My quotes in the previous posts taken from the book “ Elevate” and J Krishnamurthy are related to this. 
So let us accept multi dimensional views on religion and God.  Upanishads try to define Brahman by different methods. They accept the fact that these need to be perceived by individuals through internal realizations and can't be explained in writing. Your views are similar.
Thanks
Greetings
Dks
13/01/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Today is Arudra Darshan . It honours the cosmic dance of Lord Shiva. This dance represents five activities: Creation, Protection, Destruction, Embodiment, and Release. It symbolises the continuous cycle of creation and destruction. The festival celebrates this ecstatic dance, which is believed to take place in every particle.
Today is also Thiruvathirai. It  is the nakshatra or "star" of Shiva as per the Tamil calendar. It is believed that on this day, the Goddess Parvathi finally met Shiva after her long penance and Shiva took her as a saha-dharma chaarini (equal partner).
Let us pray to Lord shiva as Nataraja and Parvathi. Let us understand the cosmic cycle.
Greetings 
Dks
13/01/25, 5:58 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Very insightful comments on religion Sir. Regarding dharma, we say it is much deeper than religion. Yad dharayati Sah dharmah.. Is it the cosmic design that ties the world together? Realising and following that will make society ethical and progressive. Please give your views on this Sir. <This message was edited>
14/01/25, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 599
There is a query from Mr BS Murty on spiritual infrastructure. I will take it after the query on religion.
Dr Sanjay Chitnis adds to our discussion on religion.  
“Very insightful comments on religion Sir. Regarding dharma, we say it is much deeper than religion. Yad dharayati Sah dharmah.. Is it the cosmic design that ties the world together? Realising and following that will make society ethical and progressive. Please give your views on this Sir.”
My response:
I said religion has many views. Let us expand that idea.

There are several components to a religion. 
Religion can be viewed as principles, scriptures,  practices, etc. 
Let me list the core aspects of a religion as perceived by us, Hindus. It is based on my understanding of the Scriptures and not on what is happening in the world today. 
1.Religion looks for unknowns . Cosmic world is a great unknown . While the western religion ignored the cosmic space, Indian philosophy looked at a vast cosmos. It identified various constituents of the cosmos like planets, stars etc. It plotted the movement of the sun and some stars. So the major focus of a Religion is search , search for unknowns, search for causes, search for existence , search for life, search for understanding etc. It is a search for ever and about eternity and everything.
2. Religion looks at infinity. Indians  looked at the cosmos as infinity. Scientists found that space is expanding. Infinity is a key concept of our philosophy. 
3.Religion looks at eternal as another aspect .  It refers to two different domains. One is a code of conduct for a society called sanatana dharma.  There are several aspects discussed here. Dharma becomes a major operational, not just philosophical , constituent of a religion. It is called eternal. It is what we expect everyone to follow.  It is the core of an operational religion. The other component of “eternal” deals with  cosmic consciousness. Even stars have birth and death. They are not eternal.  Only cosmic consciousness is eternal not the constituents 
4. As a corollary of eternal, it also postulates that everything is changing and not eternal. what is seen and perceived varies with each person and so that picture   is not real , it is a myth or Maya. There are millions of views of the world and the happenings in the world. 
5. Religion looks at wholeness - purnam.  
6. Religion is not concerned with relative aspects.  It focuses on the absolute. 
7.Religion looks at interlinkages,  relationships. Science focuses on finiteness,  matter and entities. Religion focuses on infinity, eternal, and interconnectedness. This is a great concept of our Religion. We looked at the cosmos and built links to our life. Hinduism is the only religion which discusses the relationships between stars, planets, zodiac signs, and people. Astrology studies the dynamics of the linking. Even our both calendars employ the positions of stars ,moon, and planets along with day and month. We understood that weather , seasons depend on the positions of stars and planets . We realised that emotions depend on the moon's waxing and waning.  We understood the fact that the sun determines our actions like planting , harvesting etc. We used solar energy to a maximum extent. 
8. Religion looks at evolution. Rig veda talks about life spans of each entity. 
9. Religion is primarily concerned with perceiving and understanding unknowns in a correct manner.
10. Religions like philosophies focus on truth , various forms of truth and also ascertaining ways of proving a statement as true or false. There are four types of negatives: something is different, something didn't exist, something existed before but not now, something may exist in future. A lot of discourses of a Religion deal with the aspects of ascertaining the truth.  
11. Religion looks at our life , purpose of our life, principles of life, societal living,  sustainability etc.  It deals with interrelationships with nature , harmony.  It wants an order - rhythm in Sanskrit- to be established in a society. So it creates an entity with unlimited powers and eternal and calls it God.
12. Religion emphasizes jnana- of different kinds. It talks about acquiring jnana from different routes and gives a strong emphasis on self introspection, contemplation and self learning.  
13. Religion defines good practices. Hinduism gives us options of selecting a path. It talks about nishkama karma - Bhagavad Gita. It provides detailed instructions for a correct living.  It defines a purpose in life- increase  your consciousness, search for the eternal. Some steps have been suggested to help in the search. 
14. Hinduism also looks at the human system and proposes ways of living longer and happier through many approaches like yoga, meditation, prayer, Homa and yaga, temples . It emphasizes holistic and combined and harmonious and shared living. 
15. Acharyas explain the various components and built easier systems and practices to follow.  Bhakti and rituals became the easiest aspects to follow. 
Comments please.
Greetings 
Dks
14/01/25, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Today is makara sankranti or pongal. It is based on the movements of sun. Sankranti refers to the transmigration of the sun from one zodiac to another in Indian astronomy. In Saurmana varsha (Hindu Solar year), there are twelve Sankrantis which correspond with twelve months of a year.
Makara Sankranti means sun transiting to north , also known as Uttarayana. This festival is celebrated across India and also neighbouring countries. Sun is worshipped on this day. It is also known as the harvest festival.  Let us pray for the prosperity of all. 
Greetings.
Dks
23/02/25, 5:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 639

Definitely , the period 1984 to 2000 was a good period for the country. There were many developmental initiatives that started in this period of liberalized economy. Quality of life improved. 
By the late 1990s the world saw the shift from industry to people . Two major developments in technology helped the people. 
One was the Internet,  another was mobile phones. 
Actually the 20th century ended with a comedy and a tragedy. 
The comedy was the Y2K problem. Doomsdayers predicted the entire computer systems in the world will collapse in 2000 due to confusion in the representation of the  year inside with only two digits, ignoring 19. This will make programs misbehave. Companies in the west panicked. It was a bonanza time for Indian IT companies like TCS , Infosys. They got huge projects to walk through computer codes, mostly written in Cobol , and rectify the year representations. This gave jobs to lakhs of people in India.  TCS developed an automation to pick out specific  codes representing or using a year and modify it. It was faster . Anyway, Indian companies didn't bother. I had discussions with governments , and they weren't worried. 
So when 2000 arrived, no disaster was in sight. Everything was fine. Maybe Indian IT companies may take credit. But it was much ado for nothing. 
But the major development was the Internet, the world wide web and the internet was the magical door of Alladin  that opened the entire world to a user. Its power wasn't understood by developers. 
So it started with the dotcom bust, not a boost . There was no indication that the Internet will be influencing our life, our global reach, our global communications, our decisions, our social and professional activities, our business , and most importantly our knowledge about various aspects of the world - world at our fingertips. It started slow, picked up pace and covered every aspect of the world’s actions. 
We at iisc started using email by early nineties.  But the first commercial mail was introduced by Sameer Bhatia and that was a success. Many startups which came up with .com suffix to offer services died down quickly. The reason was simple: the Internet was easy to use and embed in applications. There was no great technology to be developed to use the internet. Most people browsed the web easily. 
The Internet brought in the concept of standalone applications that are usable by people, the only requirement was a PC and a digital connection- dial up line first , DSL later . 
Initially, it was used for sending mails followed by skype,  a video calling application. Many older people used it for email and calls. It was convenient to talk to people anywhere, a big change in our lifestyle and a lot of happiness. 
Most software applications were modified to connect to users through the Internet. So online connectivity was easily established with people across the world. 
Google’s search engine was a great invention used by millions today. It made a PC an indispensable tool to access Information.  So Internet became very powerful. 
Then came the ecommerce revolution ,experienced by most of us. It brought materials, food to our doorstep. 
Internet development was based on standard protocols- http and tcp/ip. 
That ease of building websites, hosting them and putting and receiving  Information and accessing millions of websites are easy tasks. You don’t need an IT expert. So technology moved into people’s hands. 
More in the next post
Greetings 
Dks
24/02/25, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Taking a break.
Many are tired of my topics and post. Let us think and look for some topics
Thanks for support. It was remarkable.  
Greetings 
Dks
25/02/25, 8:41 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, We are looking for these things written in the form of a book.
25/02/25, 8:42 am - Sanjay Chitnis: It may be possible to collate your existing posts and use AI to segregate and link them...
25/02/25, 8:45 am - Sanjay Chitnis: We are celebrating AI Fest this week and on Friday afternoon 2-3 PM want to have a panel discussion with AI experts. We will be really honoured if you can join as a  panelist on 28th, 2 PM - 3 PM in our campus representing Academic? Other panellists are mainly form industry.
25/02/25, 8:45 am - Sanjay Chitnis: AI Disruptions & the Future of Work: Are We Ready?
 
How AI-driven automation and decision-making are transforming the workforce, requiring new skills and adaptability.
Discussion Points:
How AI is reshaping industries (finance, healthcare, cybersecurity, manufacturing)
The rise of AI-augmented roles vs. job displacement
The future skills landscape: what students and professionals need to thrive
Role of academia in bridging the AI talent gap
25/02/25, 8:45 am - Sanjay Chitnis: You can give the holistic perspective of AI, not just the technology and impact on jobs..
25/02/25, 8:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Will be happy to join and give my views please confirm.
25/02/25, 8:47 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thanks a lot
25/02/25, 8:47 am - Sanjay Chitnis: We will arrange for pickup and drop and also, as it is close to lunch time, we are arranging lunch with panellists just before the event.
26/02/25, 5:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Very pious Maha shivarathri. Pray for his benign energy to pervade everywhere and give us peace and good health. 
Greetings
Dks
27/02/25, 2:56 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir and belated best wishes for Mahashivarathri!
27/02/25, 2:56 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: This is regarding panel discussion for tomorrow.
27/02/25, 2:57 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: REVA Drive Rupesh will pick you and drop back.
27/02/25, 2:57 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Rupesh Driver REVA.vcf (file attached)
27/02/25, 3:04 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Please share the location where he should pick up? I suppose it is Brigade gateway.., but it will be useful to have the exact location where he can pick you up/wait. <This message was edited>
27/02/25, 3:07 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: You are invited to have lunch with us before the discussions.
27/02/25, 3:07 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Please feel free to call me anytime Sir in case you need any clarifications/suggestions/support needed.
27/02/25, 4:38 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: https://maps.app.goo.gl/JDdHYp9frfjVecQ88
27/02/25, 4:40 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Address is k804 brigade gateway Apts, 
Near orion mall
Entrance from milk colony road side adjacent to railway line. 
Dks
27/02/25, 4:50 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Noted Sir. I will ask to call you once he is at the gate and then come inside to pick you up near your building. Hope this is OK.
27/02/25, 4:51 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: What time he is expected here tomorrow?
27/02/25, 5:30 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Will 12 Noon be OK? So that you can reach REVA by 1 PM.
27/02/25, 5:30 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: We are near Yelahanka (kattigenahalli)
27/02/25, 5:37 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: 12 noon is fine.
27/02/25, 5:41 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir.
28/02/25, 5:00 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, my sincere thanks to you for giving an excellent perspective!! I wish we had more time. We will plan better in the future.
03/03/25, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 641
Let me start my posts again after a very brief break. The reason is the posts received from some of you telling me that they read my posts and liked them. 
Some comments are posted below.
Mrs Meena Muralidharan
“Good morning Anna.
Hope it is only a short break.
Your posts opened up many windows for new vistas.
I am struck with awe about your achievements.
It is amazing that you could recollect so much with great details.
Whether  or not I could comprehend all the subjects in your posts,they made interesting reading.
Hope you continue with many more after a short break.
Thank you.” 

Mr PV Joshi , Indian bank
“Hello Sir ,  I will request you to continue your writing. It’s your expression. I find the documentation useful and interesting. Don’t bother about people who find it boring. Documentation I’d very important for future generations. If you feel take a brief break , but don’t stop. 
Thanks n Regards” 

Mr Srinivasan , PNB called me to request me to continue my posts. 
His post -
“Good morning sir.  No post  is like no newspaper day.”

Mr Inderjit Arora, PNB
“It's always enlightening to read your posts Sir 🙏🏽

I will never get tired. Looking forward….”


Dr. TKM Babu
“Dr DKS
It was a good revision for me to recollect what had happened during our times.
Thanks a lot for your meticulous writing.
Take Care
Mahendra Babu”

Dr Sanjay Chitnis 
“Dear Sir, We are looking for these things written in the form of a book.
It may be possible to collate your existing posts and use AI to segregate and link them…”

Mukul Jain
“Thanks for educating us on different topics. We really enjoyed. Regards”

Shubha Ravi
“I didn't read some of your post as I was busy with my last minute preparation for my Kovidha exam. Now only I am reading one by one. I have to read two, three times to understand.”
Mr Aravind ,TCS
“Sir, your perspective of history through your eyes has been remarkable. It has seen a lot of traction with some people in my cousins group, who liked these musings.”
More comments  in the next
Greetings
Dks
04/03/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 642
More comments

Mr KN Venkatesh, KSCST 
“Dear Sir,
Like every day, I am one of the reader of your posts and topics in WhatsApp.

Your topics and posts have indeed been remarkable, and I'm grateful for the insights you've shared till yesterday.

Really it's Eye-opener for many technicians, faculties and researchers.

I'm sure you'll come back with fresh perspectives and engaging topics. 

Your contributions are valued, and I look forward to your return.
Thanks and regards
KNV”.

Mr HS Nagaraja, Kirloskar electric.
“Good morning sir.
You really need some rest. Please have a break and come back with your posts on  the topics either chosen by you or by the recipients of your posts. 
Thanks, have a healthy break. With regards.
Greetings: HSN”

Dr Shalinie, TCE, Madurai
“Looking forward for your posts soon Sir. 
Thank you for keeping us enlightened.”

Mr N Ramanathan,  MD, Ponni sugars
“Whether or not readers need, you certainly deserve a break. Expect you to come back reinvigorated.”

Mrs Rajalakshmi Lokanathan says “ feel a vacuum”
Prof K C Shinde, SDMCET, Dharwad 
“It was an enlightening series sir. Thank you “

Sunil Mohan, PNB
“Good Morning Sir, thanks for starting to enlighten us with valuable info and thoughts. At least I missed out something important every morning for the last few days. 
Please continue with your posts.”
Prof P Raja
“Sir 
Good morning. 
You were seamlessly narrated and walked through almost the century of social, political and technological developments. Certainly, you have mesmerised the readers to know it fully. 
It's a request to continue your posts at your convenient frequency. All are longing for. 
Thanks sir.” 
Rajani
“Welcome back anna😊 I  look forward to setting time aside and read your amazing posts daily. Happy you are resuming 😊”


Thanks to all . I am overwhelmed by your affection . Your encouragement in a continuous way over the years is astonishing. I am humbled. 
I want to send the post to only those who are interested. I don't want to disturb others. Those interested ,please,  send a post to me so I can continue. 
The above persons needn't send a request. I won't send future posts to those who don't respond. I assume that they are not interested
Greetings 
Dks
05/03/25, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 643

Let me start from where we left off. We are looking at society technology interactions and the role of the government and people in our country's development. 
Let me sum up the situation till 1995.
I made a few  statements on the progress of our country. 
1.we initially went through improvements in agriculture after independence. We reached self sufficiency in food grains production by 1980 through the green revolution. Food grains were available at subsidised prices . Governments stored millions of tons of food grains in many locations across the country.  This was due to the efforts of researchers at ICAR. Government played an important role in this. 
2. Governments played a big role in improving our education infrastructure. We had many engineering colleges running in the country. But our technical education gained a big growth only in the nineties with a large number of colleges set up by private people . That helped in bridging the gap in technology with the west, and also allowed us to move into new disciplines like computers, software and IT.
3.  We followed wrong models and policies . This led to a big stagnation of industrial development in the country till 1990. But after 1985, our technology development moved faster. Still, technology restrictions by the US remained for us for a long time. IISc could not buy supercomputers. Dept.  of space, defence , DRDO could not import the latest computers. Even the Oracle database was not available for them. It took a decade more  to move towards normalcy in the relations with the US. That meant that our real technological progress started in the 21st century.  
4. The government constructed a number of power projects, but it didn't address many aspects in these activities - Firstly, the affected people were displaced with meagre  financial compensation and sometimes people are displaced twice.
 Secondly the ecology of forests was drastically affected. Madav Gadgil talked of desertification in once dense forest areas. Government didn't address catchment area development in their strategy. This also increased the silting rate in our reservoirs. 
Thirdly, most electrical energy is transmitted to larger cities far away from the power plants. Areas close to a power plant never got power supply. Most villages in two hydro  power rich districts of karnataka - Shimoga and uttara kannada districts- didn't have electricity till the nineties.  That led to inequalities in distribution.
5. In addition to the wrong Anti computer policies of our government,  the labor union also opposed the introduction of computers in any organization. Our banks , insurance, railways and governments suffered because of this opposition. The passenger reservation system of railways was successful and veey popular and hence was not opposed, but the freight scheduling system was scuttled by George Fernandez in the late eighties. I was involved with that project . It didn't see any progress for decades. 
Similarly the electronic voting machines , a great innovation , was opposed in the late eighties or early nineties  by Mr VP Singh , ex PM. I had to defend it to the press.  Both ECIL and BEL built these machines using robotic processes. Rangarajan - writer Sujatha- was in charge of this project in BEL. I supported the Introduction of this machine. The attacks continue even now due to total misunderstanding of the technology. I had heated arguments about the correctness of the machine with an electronics engineer from NAL.
6. The nineties saw a good pace of development. This was mainly due to a benign governance and people's efforts. People played a major role. Industrial progress was satisfactory. 
7. The major change we saw in the nineties is the emergence of IT services. We took leadership in this IT area. That kept our economy in good shape and created many jobs. The entire ecosystem was fueled by the private sector . The government only looked at IT development in the government sector with the help of NIC , but most activities in the government were conducted by the private sector. CMC was the only government company. ECIL’s efforts on building computers were abandoned by the nineties.  
8. Migration of a large number of Indians to the middle east for the general services like house construction, house work ,  technicians , engineers etc led to a comfortable foreign exchange position. 
9.. By 2000, India was not considered by many as a poor country with sadhus, snakes , beggars,and rope tricks. India's technology and services competencies  were recognised by the western developed countries . 
10. Communism as a soviet or Chinese model died in the seventies. The communists became middle class parties . Similarly, by the nineties ,socialism as a concept died. Is it due to vote buying in elections. All parties had only rich candidates and corruption flourished.
11. It shows that people loved freedom,  didn't bother about governments but changed them based on emotions and personal benefits . 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
06/03/25, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 644
We saw several aspects. Let me look at some negatives particularly of great concern to me - education and technology.
What are the areas with lacunae?
Education system - still Macauley based producing clerks. Innovation is ignored. Querying is forbidden. Rote learning is preferred. The focus was on science and mathematics, even in those areas,  analytic thinking approaches were not accepted. The system was highly colonial. 
It produced a large middle class of people with a colonial mindset. That is a big tragedy. We see that attitude percolating in our thinking and actions even now. It is a big danger. 
Education is not holistic, does not develop character, ethics, values in students. It does not encourage thinking and curious persons. This is a big disaster in today's AI world. Despite this system , many people did well due to societal ambience and genetics strengthened by thousands of years of gurukulam learning. 
Culture was thrown out. Mogul history was brought in with focus. Regional histories were ignored. Human sciences were neglected. This is a serious problem. It destroyed our heritage, made us inferior with a guilt feeling in our culture and bonded us to a western set of beliefs and practices. We almost discarded the extensive and well developed Indian philosophical system with vedanta and six darshanas and tried to follow western philosophical ideas. India is the only country which banished religious and spiritual thoughts from our education system. We don't tell people about the extensive knowledge repository in our upanishads, sastras , our grammar system and a very large collection of Indian literature in many Indian Languages. Even the philosophy is not understood by most . 
People ,though not taught cultural aspects  by the education system , learnt it from parents, neighbours, community , festivals ,temples , and tours to many culturally rich places. That tradition survives. Interest in Ramayana and mahabharata persists. Oral learning was more effective than formal education. I admire the resilience of common people, the greatest example being  the just concluded Kumbha mela.

Again we inherited an outdated university system from the British.  It was unfortunately an affiliation type within hundreds of colleges in a university with no independence and almost no say in the curriculum or education system or evaluations. This crippled our higher education. This system is still there . Fortunately there are some autonomous institutions designing their curriculum and conducting their courses and evaluation. Most university curriculum is old and irrelevant. This further crippled our education. Fortunately Country has many leaders in IISc, IITs, TIFR, BITS, and some good private universities. Most universities didn't have a good computer infrastructure and didn't initiate CS research. They were far behind engineering colleges in computer infrastructure and teaching. 
Story is the same now - most universities are  blissfully ignoring AI applications and research. It is a big tragedy. We need an action plan with a big stick to enforce it. 
Employment focus was on routine functions. Jobs didn't give opportunities or challenges to show one's  intellectual potential. I feel  that most retire intellectually at the age of thirty. 

Hope that gives a good picture of our society . It shows that development moved separately from education and had limited influence from education or government.  Our rich traditions of trading over centuries helped in our marching forward. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
07/03/25, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 645

Some comments:
Sainath Sankar
“ It was great to get your posts on a daily basis. I have missed some of the them but they were very important to understand the social, economic and technological aspects of growth to understand how we got here and what should be our way forward and it definitely gives someone like me a very fresh perspective”

Dr S Ramakrishnan 
“My dear  nephew, 
I am happy to know that  you  have  started  with  redoubled  vigour  in  writing  your  posts, I do not agree with  your  judgment  tha many  ar e  tired  of  the  posts  and  topics,   In fact,  boredom  is  not  in  the  subject  or  the  author,   It is  in  the  receiver,   For  example,  there  are  parallel  sessions  even  In  international  conferences,  A delegate  could avoid  some papers totally,  He may  be  averse  to  them,  but  many  could  enjoy  them  also,
During his  visit  to Sankara  Nethralaya,  Abdul  Kalam   wanted  to  to know  from  us , the  meaning of  Madhyannikam worship of Sun  'PASYEMA  SARADACCHADAM  ( the  meaning is ;  let  us  have  good  vision  for  100  years,   It  has a hidden  meaning also I,e, let us  live   for   100  years,  only if we live, we cam see ),  Abdul  Kalam   enjoyed it very much, Likewise,  ALL  YOUR   POSTS   will be  enjoyable   and  interesting  for 
Some  sections or other,  The   recent  ones   are   like   Badam Halva  for   top-professionals, Research-workers, Teachers etc, 
That  is  why they   have  written  appreciatory  feed-backs,  and  have   requested  for  your  continuation of the  academic  feast, We  got our quota of Badam  Halva  in your  previous  posts,  Congratulations,  Ramakrishnan   4 -3-25

Mrs Rukmani Anantharaman 
“Dear Anna, 
Namaskarams.
Thanks for restarting your posts., I was beginning to miss them.  
Your posts are multi dimensional , laden with interesting information  ,
which makes them highly engrossing. One has to take time to read and assimilate  the content,which 
stimulates one's intellect and offers introduction to various topics , hitherto unknown .
Among different interesting topics ,I enjoy the historical  narratives because my 
interest in politics and history developed only in ny later years and I had missed out many important  events  of earlier times. With your objective analysis of the social, political and economic dynamics of olden days, we are able to revist history and I can now catch up with all the happenings of that era.Like watching  a ' 'black and white ' movie!
The reason that I am not responding frequently is because, I feel that I can neither match up to your standards nor can I  make any meaningful contributions .My responses will only  be repetitive expressions of awe at your memory, brilliance,depth of  knowledge etc etc.
I can assure you that I do not find your posts ' boring'.On the contrary,
I look forward to receiving  them daily.They are a
 treasure for posterity. 
Namaskarams.”

Mr Jayakar 
“Sir, 
Pl include me in the message list. Your take on AI, it's future course, and also on vedas are enlightening. I take time in reading your posts, sometimes repeatedly. It has become my daily course material. It is manna for the brain and reference material for speeches and discussions. Wisdom should be given to only those who seek for it; I beg to you for it.”

Mr D R Krishnan
“I am one of your regular reader with occasional comments 
Would like to continue reading your post
I am in Bangalore hence can receive your post earlier 😀”

Mr Gurumurthy
“Please keep me posted, Sir. I don't respond for two reasons. I am unable to compose the right words needed to respond. Secondly, unlike most others, I am blessed to get opportunity to interact with you, almost daily. “

Prof Gopinath
“Respected sir
Enjoying your valuable posts for the past two years.Your insight to technical education in India is remarkable.Keep enriching our knowledge sir.
Thanking you 
Dr K.Gopinath”

AL Sriram
“Good Morning C’pa, I am definetely interested. There’s so much to learn. And your posts further kindle my thoughts. It enables me to ponder over many a connected concepts. And the web of understanding it creates for me, by me connecting the dots is fulfilling. I look forward to the posts. Have a good day. Namaskarams.”

Rajani.
“Welcome back anna😊 I  look forward to setting time aside and read your amazing posts daily. Happy you are resuming 😊”

I feel humbled. Happy to pass on my perceptions to others. 
I know that each one of us has a view, some have a very strong view on our socio economic developments. Each one of us view various happenings in their perspective. I got a comment which justified that happenings during the period 1970 to 85. 
My intention is not just to give my opinion or justify or criticize the governments. I could not give a comprehensive critique of Indian economic, industrial and political systems. I wanted to pinpoint a few milestones. My intention was to remove the mistaken impression that government policies are responsible for our development. Policies may help or hinder. But development depends on people - that was my thesis. 
I don't want to pass value judgments here. 
My intention is to show the happenings as they occured , not only by the governments but also the industries and people as well their impacts on the people. I assumed my reflections were realistic ,not exaggerated or unreal. 
All of us have a right to have their opinions. I respect it. 
Thanks to all. It was and is a great journey. 
Greetings 
Dks
08/03/25, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 646

My comments on education elicited two comments. 
Dr TKM Babu agreed with me about the state of our university system. His comments are
Universities are unwieldy with too many affliated colleges. So we need more smaller universities. 
He feels educationists are influenced by administrators.
“ That is very true in most states and even in central institutions. Freedom and independence are needed.” My comment. 
He feels that system doesn’t encourage thinking. 
He suggests that curriculum should be left to the colleges. 
Thanks Babu.

I have another query from Dr RN Mathur, a good friend with whom I was closely associated in NPIU during the initial first phase of TEQIP. I learnt a lot from him. Later he started an NGO called EQUATE. I participated in his programs in many cities like Jaipur, Silcher,Surat, Delhi, Raipur, Karad etc. 
He has a query:
“Sir, 

You conducted a large number of training programs in different institutions under the banner of EQUATE INDIA
that included many engineering collages NITs etc.
I remember though the progams were for selected faculty but all faculty were freed from their classes to attend your deliberations and all felt that your visit to their campus was just like a saint visiting some temple. I remember when faculty thanked me for bringing you to their institutions.
You covered very important topics like engineering research, advance pedagogy and engineering innovations apart from many other topics.

How was your experience? 

Dr. Mathur”

My response.
Thanks Dr Mathur.
It was a great opportunity and a great experience. 
Let me fix the time periods.
I was with you in TEQIP during 2000 2008 or so. 
Then I was lecturing in your programs under EQUATE during 2009 to 2020. 
I enjoyed my participation  in both activities.
Unfortunately the period 2002 to 2020 were the busiest and craziest days in my life. I was very busy at IISc as a dean and chair of several committees, I was closely associated with NRDMS project of both KSCST and DST and was involved with the other world Bank on the state of environment for karnataka as a coordinator and a key topics of energy writer - this involved hundreds of meetings and travels including a small accident of my falling down in a town in karnataka , I think Bellary. 
Later from 2002 to 2020, I was busy with IT transformations in several banks starting with Indian bank and then to PNB, corporation bank, syndicate bank , Vijaya bank ,IDRBT etc. I was also with TCS in the research board.  It was tough . Still I kept my commitments to you and lectured in most of the programs . I liked those experiences . Those experiences are now crystallized into a full fledged transformation engineering course now. Iam offering it in a few engineering colleges.  
The first thing that impressed me about these programs was  your innovative approach in the design of these programs. Also both you and Dr Bhatnagar were involved and committed in the program - kaaya - body-, Vaacha- voice- , Manasa- mind - ,  Buddhi - intellect- , Hriday - heart or love- ,  all in the task. That impressed me, who has participated in hundreds of faculty development programs for more than 40 years , conducted for teachers and industry persons , and government officers.
The second thing I liked was the topics given to me. 
I enjoyed preparing for my talks. I loved my talk on research methodology a lot. It started with definitions , processes, selection of topics , publications and anecdotes about my experiences at IISc.  This topic was discussed in many programs and liked by the participants.  I also sharpened my presentations. You also participated and made critical comments. 
I always loved to talk about pedagogy and teaching for more than forty years in several engineering and science colleges and so I was happy to give a series of  lectures on pedagogy . I still vividly remember the talk at Jaipur- I think it was our  first  visit . I was talking about definitions and discriminations with examples of the second law of thermodynamics, program vs  process vs thread, hub.vs switch vs router , etc. 
My third remembrance was about the ethics lecture, I think at Raipur. It was attended by the principal of the pharmacy college. 
I saw in most programs your keenness to improve pedagogy. You introduced many methodologies in those programs. 
It was a great time and great experience. Thank you and Dr Rajani for those excellent days. 
Greetings 
Dks
09/03/25, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 647
Another comment:
HS Nagaraja
“It is really interesting & illuminating feedback from the readers of your posts. Pranams to all.
🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏”
Thanks.

There is a comment from B Sambamurthy :
“I was listening to one of the academic. He says that we focus more on Publishing Papers and less on getting patents. He suggests a paper to patent ratio of One. As you know patents are important to protect technology for our country's development and progress.
Any thoughts please?”
My thoughts. 
We need to understand the realities before setting targets. 
Publications culture is more than two  centuries old . It was an accepted norm for academics. It provided open access to people in libraries  without any commercial intentions. Many swear by it. 
Publications were the only approach to convey research outputs. Later conferences came up to provide opportunities for publications. 
These offer great interactions and cross fertilization of ideas. I have attended hundreds of conferences , given keynote talks and also research presentations. I saw a lot of benefits from them. Academic collaboration takes place through this route. 
There are hundreds of journals to publish. So there is a variety. 
Publications generate peer group interactions and meetings. This aids in generating new areas and strengthening existing areas. Most technology developments came through this route. Conferences play a big role in networking. 
Most advances came through research Publications and not patents. 
There is a well tested method for refereeing papers and maintaining standards. 
The process for publications takes lesser time leading to a compounded growth in research. 
But patents are at the other end. They are the outputs of a research and development activity. 
Patents process is not clear to many researchers.
Patent culture should evolve. It is happening slowly. 
There is one patenting authority compared to hundreds of journals and hundreds of conferences . Opportunities are high. 
Multiplier effects of patents are way low compared to publications. Publications quickly multiply. 
Most technical developments in many disciplines came from publications Not patents. This is true with all developments in computers. Patents lead to jugaad,a small innovation and  not a breakthrough. Breakthroughs will be rejected by the patent office. There may be exceptions but not the rule . It is rare that patents lead to multiplier effects and great innovation. Based on innovation one publishes many papers and apply for patents . These papers are available to most institutions and are indexed . 
We need to create an environment for patents similar to what is existing for publications. Then only they will become popular and acceptable.
The reviewers available for publications are in thousands in every area but not in the case of patents. The Patent process is more of a repository . 
So I feel it is unjust to equate both. Many academics will consider it a sacrilege. 
True , Patents have a commercial role and is doing  it well. But patents won't aid furthering of research by academics. Each has a separate role . Let us not replace one with another or reduce the role of research publications to promote patenting. 
Normally it is our practice at IISc  to measure an academic with a multidimensional approach - publications, research projects, consultancies, interdisciplinary work, teaching . All people are not measured on one yardstick. One may be a great paper producer. Another may handle large projects with development outcomes like large software, instruments, renewable energy devices etc, some do good theoretical research, some applied research. So the measurement indices and processes accept diversity. 

Hope my views are clear. Patents have a role but can't be compared to publications. The one-  one ratio is a disaster for research. 
Greetings
Dks
10/03/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 648

Before I  move to discuss the 21st century and discuss the  people first transformation that happened , there is a very good suggestion  from Mr Mahesh Jain . Let us look at it ,as it is important. 
Mahesh Jain:
“It will be interesting that one could design a sample education system until the 12th standard. The most important learning in human education is 1 to 12. We can create a graduate course and then post a graduation course. There are many takers as AI is out to democratize tutoring, at least. History has given a chance to India to re-establish its own education …”

My response 
I am glad you raised this. I know you are keen on improving the quality of education , not just teaching learning processes alone. 
This is an important approach for everyone of us  to think about. 
But our school education system is a politically sensitive, almost a mafia based system. Untangling is not easy. We shouldn't go for changing the system, but motivate about 100 schools to follow a different path and show that they can produce a better system that can be followed by others. But there is also a danger there - they may end up as elitist institutions and not motivating institutions. This will create a new caste like IITs.  But IITs did play a good role in modernising our engineering education. 

Before I start discussing this, i feel that we should know the problems and difficulties.  So let me start with a brief ,but not comprehensive  status of our school education . This should really focus us on feasibilities. Let me say upfront that at least some should look at a holistic map of multiple views and multiple approaches.
Let me start with a big positive. NEP , new education policy addresses some concerns raised by us on a holistic , enquiry based, practice oriented balanced education system.It wanted to reduce the curriculum.  It has many good points. But its implementation is not going in a good direction. It is embroiled in controversies. Some discuss its focus on three languages only. The biggest problems are: politicalisation
 Rigid views, policies and implementations
Poor understanding of NEPs focus. 
Looking for “ one size fits all” solution. 
Are we a single unitary and completely homogeneous society ?
Are all students have similar interests, similar learning capacities ?
Is our curriculum relevant?
Does teaching attract students to learn?
The answers are no. 
We don't look for locally tailored locally relevant and locally meaningful solutions.
 But most governments  missed the main point and found easy politically acceptable paths. 
NEP wanted to shift from Macauley's focus on colonialism and shift focus to Indian cultural roots, not just historic routes. That was misquoted by many. Hindi zealots and antihindi Dravida got into this tussle. 
Anyway,  unfortunately while the policy wanted to reduce regulation and inspections , implementation does the reverse. The only way it works is to dismantle the entire inspection machinery of the states and centre and go for voluntary accreditation processes , not by one agency but by many. This current inspection system builds a strong rigidity , a sense of fear and a strong belief in the essentiality of the state run education systems . These departments of education had a lot of staff , but focuses on trivialities like teacher transfers which breeds corruption and political power. Do we need these huge directorates of public instruction? Only the SERTs play a reasonable educative role. A lot of intellectual talent is wasted there in the DPIs. Bringing in IAS officers didn't solve the problem. States should abolish these separate directorates as most jobs are done by the secretariat departments and ministers. 
Most educationists focus on the delivery methods and not the foundation . Even their approach is constrained by formal and known thinking. Unorthodox approaches are not accepted by the experts. Pedagogy research needs to be modern and broader instead of firefighting. Unfortunately most educationists are doing firefighting operations. Firefighting is required, but we fail  to look beyond. 
There are hundreds of schools which experiment with education. Many private institutions have experimented with different models of education. We have several international schools which emphasize on personality based education and focus on English, Debates, sports , outdoor activities etc. Valley schools - three of them and I visited two- tried different approaches  . But the regulatory system is strong and forces such experiments to fail. 
I have seen some schools which provide hindu cultural and religious learning in the morning and the regular board based education in the afternoon. This works well , but we need dedicated, motivated and interested students and highly dedicated teachers and management. I see more such schools coming up in the south. 
The major hurdle to a holistic system is the very strong - and assumed to be proven - urban middle class belief that their child should get a strong STEM education so that they can join IITs or go abroad. That is the minimum  yardstick of a middle class parent .  We need to work with this belief. That is important.  You can’t ignore the current belief in the concept of “ What is success in life?” We can't swim against this tide.  Or we should focus on rural children. 
There are many avenues for learning. Internet, social networks and open access has brought enormous amounts of highly enriched and understandable  information within the reach of all. This is a great boon for all. This can revolutionise learning. This has proved the Rig veda dictum “ acquire knowledge from any source wherever it may be and from anyone .” We need to remove the notion that we learn only from the schools. That dictum is dead now. Learn from the whole world. Most information is at your mobile tips. But caution is important.  Many traps exist. 
We need to encourage their use by children instead of saying - don't use internet, don't watch youtube  etc. We should educate and guide our children to watch properly , discuss with them on the topics which they are watching and keep on advising caution.
 My grandson learnt a lot through these publicly available and good as well as in depth information to learn about animals, insects and birds and later on Roman history. He has written books based on this model of learning. He even learnt languages. 
Can we ignore the experiences of our earlier gurukula system which taught knowledge to some, warfare to some others, artisan skills like foundry , steel works ,masonry , carpentry etc to some and medicine to some others through a long apprentice scheme? Can we learn from those experiences lasting thousands of years or learn from Macauley?

Let me look at the problems of school education in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
10/03/25, 8:09 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Australian startup Cortical Labs unveils 'world’s first' commercial biological computer - DCD https://search.app/mP1hxntZMvQCptTt7
11/03/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 649
We need to understand children, societal pressures and directions, purpose of education, formal and informal education, schooling, purpose of life before defining what one should learn. Again I emphasize there is no one size fits all solution. 
What are the realities wrt education now  ?
About children -
All don't have the same capabilities and interest in learning and absorption. This is accepted by the educationists. This means - 1. A graded time adjusted learning is needed.  2. Don't thrust your knowledge into children. Allow them to read, observe , discuss, experience and learn. Teaching should be minimum. 
           3. Let a child learn by itself. That is.     crucial . Let a child observe, draw conclusions , discuss and find errors and change conclusions.
All do not get interested in all subjects taught. Some like mathematics, some find it difficult. Some like music, some like psychology, some like nature etc. True, it is possible to inculcate interests in children but that needs original thinking and individual efforts. This means “ don't have a uniform curriculum . Don't thrust your ideas on children. Give them freedom. Have lots of choices . Learn from our gurukulam approach of diverse learning . A carpenter taught carpentry. An ayurveda doctor taught ayurveda. A yoga specialist taught yoga. A musician in the south taught carnatic music. A koothuppattarai taught Street plays. “  Rigidity should yield to flexibility in learning.
 Children learn faster through actions , games and stories. Ramayana, mahabharata,  Panchatantra, hitopadesha are good examples of learning. Today videos are also effective tools for learning. Khan academy is successful in teaching school level mathematics . Lots of video contents are available on the web. Schools should use these resources instead of chalk and talk. 
Children are normally curious, bubbling with questions. Schools don't look at this aspect of learning through Q and A. Use AI agents to address children's queries in a big way. We kill curiosity. That is a danger. 
Rote learning without understanding is Common. We need to look at cognitive ways of learning. 
Unfortunately there is a caste system in our syllabus. Arts , crafts and sports are the lowest caste subjects. Mathematics occupies the highest caste. This is a strong Directing force on children . It was necessary in the mid 20th century. We see its effects now - high level of stress, reluctance to go to school, poor health , poor behaviours and habits, competitive racing, work for today mentality as against a futuristic outlook , building ambitions in children , etc. We are producing slaves to jobs ,not thinking and reasoning persons. Most of us are in a hurry and a rat race  without knowing why we are running like this. It is not easy to get out of this system. We have more hackathons today, more TV competitions . We want to build superstars and end up with stressed and unhappy people.  

Let us look at what one should learn in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
12/03/25, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 650
First thing we need to understand is that there are no simple ready-made solutions which can be directly used by schools everywhere.
Localisation is important. One of my friends told me ,"Give me a few suggestions. I will go and implement it in a nearby school. “ There are no generic solutions.  But solutions are tailorable locally and we need to produce videos. 
Secondly, there are some who complain about our education system without coming up with solutions. 
Thirdly, there is a tendency to compare our system with other countries like US, UK etc. This is a highly myopic view. We can't compare . We need solutions for each district and each group of students, not an omnibus - one size fits all - solution or a cut and paste US or UK solution. 
Let me look at some low hanging fruits - some solutions easy to develop and implement.  Let me look at a few Problems in schooling that can be corrected. 
School teaching is one directional. Teachers talk about what is in the book . Most don't explain any concept.  It was routine and monotonous. It doesn't interest students in learning and it motivates a few. Students bunk classes because of this monotony. This can be corrected through use of supplementary resources available on the web. We need to build resources , modify some and publish them. 

Let me discuss an approach i followed in the mahithisindhu program. I found text books are condensed versions of concepts and had minimum exercises and practices.  So we decided to do the following. 
Identify difficult topics in mathematics, sciences , English and social sciences in 8th, 9 th and 10th class syllabus. This was done by selecting a few good teachers in each subject and requesting them based on their experiences to identify difficult topics. Then we decided to develop content for these problems with video and Hypertext.  
We gave the content development activity to a company.  They had no clue as to how to build content. I had to put them through exercises , told them to use the video media more effectively. After several sittings we got the CDs out and distributed them to 1000 high schools. 
The outcome was remarkable - the pass percentage in SSLC jumped from 50% to 75% in five years . 
We need NGOs to take  up content development in a big way and put it in youtube. It will be monetarily attractive. Also list reference resources for each topic that are available. The Khan academy example is known to us. 
Secondly we need a feedback oriented way of identifying good teachers - not the bureaucratic way followed now. We should introduce students' feedback. 
These are simple methods and can be handled. CSR funds can be availed for this purpose. 
School time table is packed. Every teacher wants to finish their portions. 

NEP talks about reducing the total content. States should implement this. Reduce the total content by 30%. 
Create many electives. Make history optional. This is doable. States need to address this aspect seriously. When you know that more than 50% of the government schools had no motivation and are slow learners, should you not address the problem of reducing the content. I feel the contents should be reduced by 50%. 
Teachers should worry about reaching important concepts to students rather than completing the portion. 
Just like the additional resources we talked about for students, we need to address the same issue for teachers. 
NGOs who develop contents should also develop teachers reference book containing reference materials, teaching methods and explanatory materials . 
Explanations are not clear for all. It is a big problem even in higher education systems. We need to explain the terms with examples and analogies extensively. Most books don't explain energy , work done, power, and effort . It is a simple job but cryptic statements are found in books. Look at the problem with an example like a car moving by a kilometer. 
What is the work done - distance travelled and total weight . 
What is the energy consumed- calculate based on fuel expended and calorific value. 
We need to build realistic understandable and localised examples. There are many such definitions which are not clear to many. There are many views to explain them. You can’t explain energy and working without talking about input , output and efficiency. I found even physics books for plus 2 or degree had not explained this properly. So again it is a task for NGOs to identify such Basic terms , take a few examples understandable by both teachers and students in rural areas and explain using videos and calculations.

More In the next.
Greetings
Dks
13/03/25, 4:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 651
I am writing these posts on education- what do we teach? as the objective. I am looking for a constructive solution ,not a criticism of the existing system. We identified problems in the existing system in order to find an alternate method to solve the problem. 
I had no intention of criticizing school teachers. They are the victims. Some suggest - change them. It is not a solution. Solution is systemic . Teachers are powerless to change the system. so we are looking at building a support structure for teachers- provide them resources, contents and explanations. This will help both teachers and students.
Many of us see teachers in a big city and create a view of a teacher. We need to see a teacher in a village - what are the resources at her disposal? None. What is the freedom available to a teacher? No freedom. 
Hence I want companies to develop supplementary materials to improve delivery and understanding.

Let me look for a concrete basis for building a learning structure. That was the request of Mahesh also. 
What aspects should our education be founded on ? 

I think education has multiple levels. The first level deals with the primary purpose of living . Life and living are close to everyone. So all aspects dealing with life and living should form the core of the primary education system. 
So we need to look at 
Life and living
Personality development 
Society aspects
Our environment 
Reading ,writing and arithmetic , speaking, languages
Health and hygiene , 
Requisites for learning.
as core areas. These should be focused in the five years. 
The contents should be based on  answers to  the following questions:
First aspect 
Who am I?
Who are we?
What is a family, society, and why do we need it?
Why are the qualities like order , law , respect, help etc required ?
What should be good habits, values, behaviours, that one should follow ?
How do I live my life?
What should be the principles to be followed in life ? Why?
How do we live?
What do I need to live? 
Where do I get my resources - water, air, food, clothes , houses ? How are they acquired?
Are we wasting resources - conservation?

Second aspect :
What is nature?
What are water sources, trees, plants, Forests, soil ,and their  importance ?
What is the relationship of nature to us?
What should I do to preserve , conserve and enrich nature?

Third aspect 
Study of human body, functions, health, healthy living , Good practices, 
Yoga , meditation , concentration , physical exercises , cleanliness .
Language and literature - reading and writing habits. 

Fourth
Essentials for survival 
Basic Mathematics - arithmetic  , shapes , geometry
Science - energy, heat , plants, reactions etc
Technology - transport, electricity for light , 

Fifth
Society 
Governance
Culture
Geography , geology 

We can have electives - agriculture,  smithy, pottery, drawing , book reading at 4th standard level ,simple  accounting, 

These form the basis for contents development. The next level will deal with skills development.  
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
14/03/25, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 652
I decided that any solution should consider our existing state of schools and teachers. I can't ignore them. Secondly, it should not rock the boat, don't suggest big changes. Thirdly, look for alternate support systems. 
The contents proposed by me looks similar to what is going on now. Some explanations are needed.
The differences are
Focus on localised content. Talk about the houses one lives, the street where a child lives and plays, the family , the trees, roads, water sources, local transports , etc. Discuss how does a family live and survived, role of materials in life , money in life. 
The next step is a starting level of discussions on the purpose of life. It is complicated. But start with the need for love, harmony, help , peace, respect , non violence , tolerance . Build values through stories of great people. Start with some stories from mahabharata,  hitopadesa - stories of friendship exists in many places. These two components- lives of leaders like Gandhi, Vinobha, etc , Scientists like CV Raman, JC Bose, Sarabhai, Bhabha, etc , engineers like M  MVisvesvaraya,  S Dhawan, etc, industrialists like JN Tata, TVS , etc, public service persons like Baba Amte, etc , great kings like Karikala chola,Rajaraja chola, nalawadi krishnaraja wodeyar etc and great administrators like Diwan Seshadri Iyer, .
Then move to community living, stability, order, community services etc.
There should be greater emphasis about nature - local plants, trees, water sources, water storage , rain, animals, insects, soil, agriculture, .
There should be discussions on resources used - water, metals, pots, dresses, food items, vegetables,  lighting, fuels, house construction materials . We should discuss how resources are used - this is missing . The sources of resources needs to be told.
The emphasis should be on conservation - nature can meet our needs not greeds. 
The most important part is human sciences -our body, mind, functions, our emotions, beliefs,  habits, etc. We may discuss our problem solving skills . 
Then comes communications - languages , reading, writing, discussing , etc.
The focus should be on what an child can relate to and experience in its home and neighbourhood.  No point in talking about planes. But simple technologies like irrigation, roads, house construction, furniture making, bricks making, cooking, lighting with electricity are useful.  
The other focus was on health - cleanliness, nutrition, yoga 
There is an important focus on meditation, yoga, concentration, contemplation and creativity. I will expand it later.

Let me give an example of Gandhi's philosophy ,deserving serious consideration to humanise education.
Core Principles:
Truth (Satya): Gandhi considered truth as the ultimate goal and the foundation of all actions. He believed that truth is God and vice-versa. 
Non-violence (Ahimsa): He saw non-violence as the means to achieve truth and a path to self-realization. Ahimsa meant not only refraining from physical harm but also from any form of violence, including hatred, anger, and injustice. 
Satyagraha: This is a method of conflict resolution and social change based on truth and non-violent resistance, emphasizing the power of love and moral persuasion over coercion. 
Educational Philosophy:
Gandhi believed in "an all-round drawing out of the best in child and man - body, mind and spirit". 
He emphasized practical education that equips individuals with skills and knowledge relevant to their lives and communities. 
Social and Political Philosophy: a very needed component in an education system.
Self-Sufficiency: Gandhi advocated for self-reliance and simplicity in living, promoting rural development and local industries. 
Equality and Justice: He fought for the rights of the marginalized and oppressed, advocating for a society based on equality and social justice. 
Sarva Dharma Samabhava: Gandhi believed in the equality of all religions and promoted religious harmony and tolerance. 
Seven Social Sins:
Gandhi identified seven societal ills that he believed were detrimental to human well-being, including:
Wealth without work
Pleasure without conscience
Knowledge without character
Commerce without morality
Science without humaneness
Religion without sacrifice
Politics without principles 
Influence of the Bhagavad Gita:
Gandhi drew inspiration from the Bhagavad Gita, viewing it as a guide to action and a source of moral values. 

More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
15/03/25, 5:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 653

Before we delve  deeper into education, i want to look at a few fundamental aspects:
What is knowledge?
What is culture, its role ?
Why religion?
What is thinking ?

There are some cobwebs within most Indians which need to be cleared ,there are  many biases to be understood ,addressed and rectified, there are guilt feelings which again should be discussed without caste feelings. 
Only then we should be able to come up with a good plan. We can't sweep all our beliefs, biases, our culture and roots under a carpet and keep a colonial mindset. That will produce an artificial education as it is happening now. 
An education system has to be open and balanced and should discuss all aspects of all sections of our society with some focus on the local society. 
Let me start with What is knowledge?
Children or even adults learn better if they know 
Why are they reading a topic? 
What is its relevance? 
Can they relate to the topic ? 
Then they learn and retain that topic better. 
I want to relate an incident from our mahithisindhu program. 
Children were excited.
1.they can see a computer and use it.
2.they read the book given to them with a lot of interest.
3. They stayed on after the class. Attendance was 100%
4.the teacher was good, knowledgeable. He or she explained well. 
So providing a complete environment excites learners.

What we are learning is not knowledge.  

Knowledge should answer the following questions with a lot of clarity and depth.
Why a concept? 
What is a concept? What are its characteristics? What are its relationships with other concepts ?  What are its uses? What are its applications? What are its advantages ? What are its disadvantages? What are needed to implement?
How do use use it, build applications, put it to use, 
How it will use resources and impact on people , environment, economy, 
Does it have a role on our economy or development or equality?
Can I derive additional concepts from this? 
What alternatives exist?
What improvements are possible?
What innovations are possible? What are needed for improvements and innovations? 

So it is clear that knowledge is not a collection of information.  But that is what is happening in our education system. So just developing content is not enough to improve our education . We need to build an architecture, a blueprint , a detailed design on every topic. 

Let me take an example - water. 
Start with why?
Properties of water- solubility, solid ,liquid and gas states.
We need water for survival. 
Can we live without water? Body has a large quantity of water. So We need water for survival. 
Our health depends on consuming adequate quantities of  Water. 
Where do you use water? Cooking, cleaning, bathing , washing, cultivation, industries  etc. 
Agriculture consumes water. What are the best practices? How do we reduce water used by industries? 
Ask students where do they use water in their houses, how much do they consume , where do they get water, who brings water home, is water in a stream,  pond or well available throughout a year? How do you reduce consumption, how do you purify water? 
We did a detailed survey in six villages in Tumkur district. They were revealing. A child is reserved to bring water everyday. 
So we  see  a demand for water. As population increases, our wants increase , water demand goes up. But the total water quantity is limited. So we should recycle water and use it after treatment . 
How do we purify water? Three pots. 
How do I get water?  Sources 
From well, lake, river. Which lake or river is nearer to you, what is the distance? 
How do I get water perennially? Rains and water cycle.
What happens to water after its use in cleaning? It becomes dirty. It spoils water sources. That is pollution. 
Ill effects of pollution - cholera, other water borne diseases, 
Pollution control . 
Treatment is needed. 
What is drought - water scarcity. 
Why draught? What are its effects? Can I predict it? Can I avoid it?
How do I store Water?
How do we get water  in the house? Taps. 
Water supply system - get water from a river, store Water , pump it to reach homes through pipes. We need a separate department to manage this. 
We need to take water to a higher level- say from cauvery river to bangalore city over a height of 500 metres. This needs energy. 
It costs money. 
Water use - wastage, conservation. 
Types of rivers - perennial , rain water drainage . Floods - reasons , how to avoid floods? 
Water coming down hills has energy that can be converted to electricity with a hydro power plant. 
Link between water and forests, water and monsoons, survival of rivers.
Each item needs more explanations, experiments , examples , best practices etc. We saw links between water, climate, rains, agriculture, industries, supply  engineering , treatments, energy, etc. 
So we need to create structures on most topics. 
We need to build a lot of resources that can be used by teachers for deeper understanding of various concepts. 
So knowledge implies questioning, going deeper into a topic, looking at it from many angles. Teach each topic through a series of questions ,not just a description as seen in books. Video based explanations are good. But students' responses are important. 
How do we achieve this huge task? Then only education will be meaningful. 
Greetings
Dks
16/03/25, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 654
Before I define knowledge , let me look at the question of how do I acquire knowledge?
One acquires knowledge through sensory perception- observations first . Then one tries to know several things first, shapes next, and actions later. One may start inferencing even as a child. That is a primary state . It is true throughout your life. 
Our daily house maintenance person  walks in saying “ sambar smells nice” on many days. She senses our cooking from outside. This knowledge is basic one used by many generations. One slowly enlarges one's world from the house to the street to the space, to the  city to the country etc. 
There are two types of sensory organs - karmendriya and jnanendriya. 
According to Sāṃkhya ontology, the five active senses (mouth /speaking, hands/grasping, feet/walking, excretory organs/excreting, and sexual organs/procreating) evolved from prakṛti are the karmedriyas.
Gyanendriyas are eye, ear, nose, tongue, skin (sense organs). 

The second level of acquiring knowledge is by listening to others and asking questions. This is the crucial bigger step in understanding the world and life. 
Here one in the older days learnt to acquire methods to get knowledge which is missing now. 
Let me look at the Indian  Concepts for acquiring knowledge in indian sastras:
Jñāna (knowledge): A general term encompassing all types of cognition, both valid and invalid.
Pramā (true knowledge): Accurate and valid knowledge, representing a true reflection of reality. 
Aparama (false knowledge): Knowledge that is not true or valid, a misrepresentation of reality. 
Pramāṇa (means of knowledge): The valid methods or sources through which we can acquire true knowledge. knowledge-generating processes, called pramāṇa, “knowledge sources.” The principal candidates are perception, inference, and testimony.
Pratyakṣa (perception): Direct sensory experience, considered a primary source of knowledge. 
Anumāna (inference): Reasoning or drawing conclusions based on evidence or observation. 
Upamāna (comparison): Knowledge gained through similarity or analogy. 
Sabda (testimony): Knowledge acquired through reliable sources, such as scriptures or experts. Arthapatti (postulation): Knowledge derived from circumstantial evidence. Anupalabdi (non-perception): Knowledge gained from the absence of evidence. 
Indian darsanas - Schools of Thought and their Views:
Nyaya:
This school is known for its rigorous logic and epistemology, emphasizing the importance of valid means of knowledge (pramāṇas). 
Vaisheshika:
Focuses on the atomic theory of reality and the nature of knowledge, often in conjunction with Nyaya. 
Samkhya:
A dualistic school that posits the existence of two fundamental realities: Prakriti (matter) and Purusha (consciousness), with knowledge as a means of understanding these realities. 
Yoga:
A school that emphasizes the importance of self-realization and spiritual liberation through practices like meditation, with knowledge as a tool for self-discovery. 
Purva Mimamsa:
Focuses on the study of the Vedas and the rituals prescribed therein, with knowledge of the scriptures as a key to understanding the divine. Vedanta:
A school that explores the nature of Brahman (ultimate reality) and the relationship between the individual self (Atman) and Brahman, with knowledge as a means of achieving liberation (moksha). 
We will continue further.
Greetings
Dks
17/03/25, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 655
There is a query from Mr  Gurumurthy: 
“Sir, under the Schools of Thought and their Views above, the last that is listed is - Vedanta. By Vedanta, you must be referring to the Upanishads. I understand that while Upanishads such as  Brihadaranyaka, Chandogya etc..relate to Advaitic thoughts, some like Katha, Mundaka etc..relate well to Dvaitic thoughts and some like Taittriya, Aitareya etc..relate well to Vishstadvaita. Among the Upanishads available, there may be some relating to every one of the Schools of Thoughts of those days. So, Vedanta, as a generic term,  relates to all the known schools and not exclusively to Advaitic school alone. Am I right in saying this, Sir?”
My response
You are right. Let me explain. The term Vedanta is used in two contexts.
One vedanta means the essence of vedas which you have quoted. This normally refers to upanishads. 
The second reference is in darsanas . Here it refers to uttara mimamsa. 
Darsanas normally list all forms of indian philosophy . They are classified into two groups - orthodox  or Vedic which refers to the six darsanas quoted by me. The second group is called shamanic-  non Vedic dealing with Buddhist,  Jaina and lokayata philosophies. 
Jain philosophy says
Anekantavada: Jainism's core principle of non-absolutism, which acknowledges the relativity of truth and the multiplicity of perspectives. Ahimsa: The principle of non-violence, which is central to Jain ethics and practice. 
Buddhism talks about middle path and Eightfold Path: The practical path to liberation, which includes right understanding, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Darsanas support either advaitic or dualistic concepts . They looked at Life from different view points ,and generated different knowledge forms to show that
1.knowledge is multidimensional. 
2. There are many views and many approaches to look at a concept. 
Kautilya classifies all disciplines into four categories: scripture (the three Vedas, trayi), agriculture and commerce (varta), politics and public administration (danda-niti), and Ānvīkṣikī, the investigative reflective science. The distinction between Atma-vidya and Ānvīkṣikī is that while the former embodied certain dogmatic assertions about the nature of the soul, the latter contained reasons supporting those assertions. Thus Ānvīkṣikī dealt with two subjects, namely, atma, soul, and hetu, theory of reasons. The Samkhya, Yoga, and Lokayata, in so far as they treated of reasons affirming or denying the existence of soul, were included by Kautilya in the Ānvīkṣikī.Of the two subjects studied in the ambit of Ānvīkṣikī, the study of soul later developed and matured into a separate independent study described by the term Darsanas (meaning philosophy), and the theory of reasons was developed into an independent branch of study referred to as Nyaya or logic. This bifurcation of Ānvīkṣikī into philosophy and logic must have had its beginning in around 550 BCE with the exposition of the logical side of Ānvīkṣikī by Medhatithi Gautama.
Greetings.   Dks
18/03/25, 5:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 656
There were four comments on yesterday's post.
Mr Srinivasan of PNB appreciated Mr Gurumurthy's comment. He liked the grouping of upanishads done by Gurumurthy.  
Mr Sambamurthy says “Very educative. Thanks DKS and Mr.Gurumurthy.”
Mr Gurumurthy has a response,” Thank you Sir for taking up my question. Your answer / clarification on the use of the word 'Vedanta' is so detailed and profound, I may have to read and mellow over it for considerable time to understand it. I will give it a try, Sir.  My sincere thanks to you once again for the troubles you have taken to clarify the point.  Best Regards.”
The fourth  comment both foxed me and also woke me up to look at this aspect which many have raised before also.The comment is by Mr HS Nagaraja :
“After reading today's post (both Q & A),  I drew blank. Sir,I am sorry to confess this.”
My response 
Sorry. Nothing wrong in your views. 
It becomes my job to explain my post . Let me relook at what I discussed on knowledge in the past few posts.
We started with the premise that we are surrounded by millions of pieces of information called facts. These can be static, dynamic, occur once in a while or randomly , may deal with any area or sector, may be trivialities, simple or complex etc. Many of  these facts have uses and impacts on us. 
The next question was how do we get these facts. We saw that we use our senses to perceive these facts. But two questions arise - is the perceived data real or illusion ? Recall the classical analogy quoted in our upanishads - seeing a rope and perceiving it as a snake. So we need one validation process for this - error correction methods. The second question is:  How well and deeply can I know and understand the fact, remember kmowing or cognition leads to knowledge - that is how do I link facts and convert it to a valid set of knowledge units. We saw an example of water.
 This is where philosophical methods come into play to Verify and validate facts.  We use logic, mathematics, experiments, experiences and other methods for this validation. Science follows a set of well defined experimental techniques . But philosophy uses many tools.
Then we focused on Indian philosophy.   1.  The main discussion was on philosophy. We use different names for our philosophy like darsanas, vedanta, anviksiki etc. 
2.  The main focus of philosophy particularly Indian philosophy is to validate facts , observations, perceptions into knowledge by validation. The focus was on truth in all forms. Truth was essential according to rig veda.  
3. Validation is done through several methods. We discussed them in post 654. 
4. We needed to know what aspects or areas  a philosophy should address. Our philosophy looks at the following -   generation of facts about.            life , living ,                              yamas and niyamas, dos and don'ts , ethics, good qualities.  Universe and creation    ,         people , their characteristics ,    society, organization, governance order , peace,         culture                 nature and environment , energy water, fire, air, earth resources, panchabhutas,                    daivatva ,      asurathva.            Cyclical process of living , samsara.                    Four purusharthas                       four ashramas                  spirituality.    Consciousness, moksha,   liberation          knowledge       acquisition methods  religious aspects    bhakti                   materialistic world    , family, survival, necessities , etc.        Numbers , arithmetic, geometry,       astronomy etc
Mysticism Is an accepted part of our philosophy. It deals with not only the observable facts but also abstract facts and unknown aspects. That is a big difference with western philosophy. We don't constrain our methods to known facts only as science does. So in effect science produces restrictive knowledge.
5. So we cover a vast canvas of issues in our philosophy , most are related to our universe, our human systems, life and living, nature etc as listed above. Definitely our philosophy dwells a lot on religious matters. But more religious matters appear in smritis  and puranas and in agamas.  
The above shows that our philosophy covers a very vast area including many abstractions like infinity , completeness, absolute etc. Our philosophy accepted the mind as a specific intangible entity in human systems and created many levels  , contrary to the belief of many that Indian philosophy addresses only religious aspects. To show that it is a fallacious statement, I looked at the six darsanas  , as well as the lokayata, charuvaka ,  Buddhist and Jaina philosophies  in brief. 
Let me continue with vedanta in more detail in the next post.
Greetings.  Dks
19/03/25, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 657
Let me start with Hinduism principles first. Broadly speaking , let me explain some features of Hinduism as I understood them. 
Hinduism advocates dharmic living. It is an integrated dharma , much more than a religion. It integrates life purposes, paths to lead our purpose, living in harmony , order , ethical values, culture , respect for nature etc. 
It accepts the fact that people are not uniform and “one size fits all”  is not accepted. It moves away from a fixed set of principles to a flexible set of paths. It defines a goal for a person - moksha or liberation. It talks about four paths - jnana, karma, bhakti, yoga.  Similarly It gives us three paths to achieve our goal - called purushartas ,these are dharma, artha, kama, leading to moksha. Dharma is the pivot around which our activities should move around. Artha is not discarded or discredited . The early exposition of these aspects were to be seen in Kautilya's  arthasastra.  
It talks about rebirth , a cyclical approach to life. It talks about rotation of manus, Brahma etc. 
Hinduism as we see today was refined over millenia. We started with Vedic age , moved to the Puranic age where bhakti dominated , though vedas were maintained by a core set of people- gurus. Bhakti manifested in many forms. 
But the core were  the following major  principles.   Truth - Satyam vada. Truth in speech, thought and actions was and is emphasized. Avoid hypocrisy is what it says though  not explicitly.                               Om Shanti- maintain peace everywhere.                              Rthm vada. For successful living as a community ,an organization is important, it should be participative . Maintain order and harmony. Don't fight among yourself.        Ahimsa paramodharmaha - shun violence .                              Respect nature, natural forces, and act responsibly.                       Lokas samastha sukhino bhavantu.              Respect , guru, parents, atithis.  Shraddhaya deyam - share , give ,. Mostly importantly acquire knowledge - mathematics, geometry, astronomy , logic, grammar, music are important for all.     Also spiritual knowledge and self awareness and self realization are the ultimate goals.                                      There were many more  yamas and niyamas prescribed. 
Yoga, meditation, samskaras, culture were accepted as part of life - making life meaningful. 
We had one governing book - Rig veda  followed by  three more vedas. All principles are codified In them. 
Rig veda gives us an idea of Brahman . It says - “Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti”  .   This statement means while the underlying truth or reality is singular, different people, or "wise ones," perceive and describe it in various ways, using different names, forms, or concepts.   Think of different religions or spiritual paths, each with its own deities, rituals, and beliefs. "Ekam sat vipra bahudha vadanti" suggests that these different paths, while seemingly diverse, all ultimately point towards the same fundamental truth. 
What are the aspects contained in Rig veda.? Rig veda talks about evolution of life, ways of living like sharing, harmony, order, social habits, respect for all, proper speaking - vak-, dos and don'ts , various aspects of like wealth, agriculture , medicine etc, various stages of life and duties , essential constituents for life like water and rains and rivers, air and winds,sunlight, fire, etc., importance of knowledge,  regular learning, and acquisition of knowledge,  respect for nature , as well as showing gratitude to all divinity through prayers . It is a short summary of a few things in rig veda.
It is by no means a thorough discussion of rig veda and Hinduism. It is written to give a broad view hisanatana dharma.   Let us continue  further.
Greetings.  Dks
20/03/25, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 658
We are looking at vedanta. The names are not always given in the beginning. The name vedanta came later. Even the name Hindu , Hinduism were given much later , in the nineteenth century. Hinduism was known as sanatana dharma.  It is not a religion but a complete methodology to life and living . Religion is one part of it. Let me next look at the evolution. Vedas were abstracted in the upanishads. That is called vedanta.   It involved three stages. 
First the operational stage - called brahmanas . These gave detailed descriptions for Vedic  practices . Four important emphases were revealed. 
Mind is the main actor - sutradhar one can say- for a person. Keep the body healthy through satvik living - satvik food, good values, harmony and close societal living. 
Deep concentration, peace of mind need to be built and practised .  This gave birth to yoga . 
Brahmanas focused on what a grihastha should do everyday. They built good practices. These were strengthened over the years. These were expanded into smritis. Since smritis contained detailed operating and living instructions to Brahmachari, education, snataka- graduate-, grihasta,  samskaras , most people followed smritis and were called smarthas. Those who followed Vedic rituals were called sroutis. 
Gratitude was considered the  important activity of a human - gratitude to nature, natural forces like sun, wind, rains, etc. This was the main focus of brahmanas to perform yagas to various gods though  a messenger - agni. This aspect of yagas was totally misinterpreted by the westerners as sacrifice. It is not just a sacrifice. Offerings are there  . But the main component is chanting and creating vibrations so that goodness prevails everywhere. The significance , meanings and effects of prayers were missed by most westerners. The main aspect of gratitude was ignored. All nature and natural forces were raised to a level of a daiva. 
This was followed by the next activity - aranyakas. They form  bridges building intellectualism leading to vedanta. Aranyakas discuss mind and jnana . They focused on the learning and knowledge component of the yagas and slowly moved away from rituals. Here is the starting point of spiritualism - nishkama karma. 
Then came a great development - the beginning of vedanta- the construction of upanishads. Brahman was a difficult concept not understood by most people, too abstract and very difficult to perceive.  So a good and detailed exposition was felt necessary. The result was a series of explanations by many gurus. We got many upanishads. All focused on Brahman and liberation. Most focused on the paths to liberation. Most upanishads talked about Atman and Brahman  and said that both are the same. 
Brihadaranyaka upanishad gives a long definition of Brahman through a long series of discussions with 1000 scholars. The Neti rule was introduced here. Sankaracharya built his edifice and structure on advaita based on this upanishad by Yajnavalkya.  
While we had one governing book dealing with dharma , that is the vedas , the philosophy produced many books over centuries and millennia because of the variety and diversity of topics and areas of discourses as well as several assumptions and methods of analysis and proofs. Hundreds of scholars worked and produced several disciplines. We saw the first six darsanas ,then added more and included arthasastra also. That was the starting point. Philosophy flourishes even now. Advaita has excited many. 
Our philosophy evolved over thousands of years and many hundreds of scholars worked on  not only the pursuit of knowledge, but most importantly on the creation of new knowledge . Several names come to our mind starting from yajnavalkya , Kapila, gowthama,  vyasa,  Patanjali, Kautilya, Aryabhatta, Brahma Gupta, Bhaskara,  varahamihira, Madhava, Ashtavakra, Sankaracharya, Ramanujacharya,  Madhvacharya, sureshwara, vidyaranya, Abhinavagupta, Appayya dikshita , Ramakrishna, vivekananda, Arobindo, Ramana maharshi and many more. 
Hope it is clear that vedanta generally means the essence of vedas. Unfortunately,  it does not fully reflect the essence of vedas. 
Vivekananda used the term "Vedanta" to refer to the culmination of the Vedic teachings, specifically the Upanishads, which he saw as the essence of spiritual knowledge. The Divinity of the Soul:A core principle of Vedanta, according to Vivekananda, is the recognition of the inherent divinity within each individual, the "Atman," which is ultimately one with the universal "Brahman".
Manifestation of Divinity:Vivekananda emphasized that the goal of Vedanta is not just to know the divinity within, but to manifest it through actions, thoughts, and emotions, leading to self-realization and liberation. 
Let us get back to knowledge.
Greetings . Dks
21/03/25, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 659
Mr Gurumurthy has a query:
“Sir, you have outlined the focus of Brahmanas, Aranyacas and Upanishads. What was the focus of Samhitas, Sir?”
The actual core hymns of vedas are called samhitas. Samhitas are the hymns in vedas. The Rigveda Samhita contains about 10552 Mantras, classified into ten books called Mandalas. Each Mandala is divided into several sections called Anuvakas. Each Anuvaka consists of a number of hymns called Suktas and each Sukta is made up of a number of verses called riks.
 As I explained , these hymns  consist of
Basic principles of santana dharma.
Concepts of life- description of the various components of the universe, Cyclical system of the universe evolution , pralaya , destruction and regeneration. Samsara . The concept of Brahman.  
Ways of living dharmically and paths to moksha. Tasks segregation was done - the specialization. 
Methods to observe the dharmic way. 
Mantras and prayers to various devas who were the controllers of natural forces like rain, sun, wind, cyclone, air, river, floods, earth, soil, plants, animals etc. 
Symbolises our activities 
Importance of knowledge , thinking, consciousness and wisdom. 
Self understanding, Self learning, Self realization - Self here is Atman.  
Yagas , the procedures, 
To know the level of detailing let me quote verse1.159 from rig veda
HYMN CLIX. • Heaven and Earth,
 I PRAISE with sacrifices mighty Heaven and Earth at festivals, the wise, the Strengtheners of Law. Who, having Gods for progeny, conjoined with Gods, through wonder-working wisdom bring forth choicest boons, 2 With invocations, on the gracious Father’s mind, and on the Mother’s great inherent power I muse. Prolific Parents, they have made the world of life, and for their brood all round wide immortality. 3 These Sons of yours well skilled in work, of wondrous power, brought forth to life the two great Mothers first of all. To keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves, ye guard the station of your Son who knows no guile. 4 They with surpassing skill, most wise, have measured out the Twins United in their birth and in their home. They, the refulgent Sages, weave within the sky, yea, in the depths of sea, a web for ever new. 5 This is to-day the goodliest gift of Savitar : this thought we have when now the God is furthering us. On us with loving-kindness Heaven and Earth bestow riches and various wealth and treasure hundredfold. 
The above talks about qualities in a child. 
Resplendent with Clarity YL70
 Seer — Barhaspatya Bharadvaja 
1. Full of clarity, resplendent over the worlds, wide, vast, honey-yielding, beautifully formed, Heaven and Earth, by the law of the Lord of Heaven are up-pillared, prolific, undecaying. 2. Inexhaustible with an abundant stream, rich in milk, they yield clarity to the perfect worker whose vow is pure. Rulers of all this world, Heaven-Earth pour in us the seed that is auspicious to men. 3. Wise Heaven-Earth, he who apportions the offering to you for right action, that mortal reaches perfection. Through his creativity he is born  from the law. From you are poured diverse forms of a common nature. 4. Heaven and Earth, encompassed with clarity, resplendent with clarity, sprinkling clarity, who increase by clarity, wide, vast, placed foremost at the worthy in vocation — the sages adore them as bliss for furtherance. 5. Mix the honey-bliss for us, Heaven and Earth, you who pour honey, who yield honey, whose law is sweet. As the Godhead holding the sacrifice and the treasure for us, grant us a great inspiration and heroic vigor. ( see how clarity is a topic here. It's importance in understanding is stressed.)
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
22/03/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 660
One more hymn from Rig veda on Welcoming dawn - ushas - . See the  bubbling positive approaches here. 
Heaven-bom by truth,  the Dawn has shone out. Revealing her majesty she has come. She has concealed die unwelcome, hateful darkness. As the foremost of the flaming seers she has set the paths in motion. 2. Be awakened today for our great and happy journey, oh Dawn, into a great auspiciousness extend us. Goddess human in mortals, hold in us a wonderful splendor and glorious revelation. 3. The wonderfully clear immortal radiances of the Dawn have come for the vision. Generating the Divine laws, rilling the interior realms, they have spread afar. 4. When she is yoked from the beyond, she travels around the five races of men in an instant. Surveying the ways of knowledge of men, she is the daughter of Heaven, the queen of the world. 5. Full of power, the maiden of the Sun, possessing a wonderful beneficence, she is the ruler of the plenitude of splendors. Lauded by the seers, giving maturity, the beneficent Dawn shines, sung by the carrier-flames. 6. Wonderfully bright radiant horses appear conveying the flashing Dawn. She travels luminous by her chariot of the universal form, as she grants ecstasy to harmonious mortals. 7. The truth with the truth, great with the great, the Goddess with the Gods, holy with all the holy ones, she broke down the firm limitations and dispensed the radiant mornings, as her rays roared to greet her. 8. Now hold for us an ecstasy made of nourishing rays and heroic force, oh Dawn, the all enjoyment made of swift energy. May our mere humanity not stain this altar. Protect us with the powers of well-being forever, oh Gods.
Rig veda contains a lot of information that is not religious ,but useful in one's life. Tools like mathematics, geometry, astronomy, Grammar, logic and music are required to understand and perform our tasks. Materials for daily use like wooden implements, bricks, are discussed. 
A detailed level of specialization -the specialists for a yaga are
Reciters of Rig and Yajur Vedic hymns are called Hotri (for Rigveda) and Adhvaryu (for Yajurveda). 
Hotri:The priest responsible for reciting the hymns from the Rigveda, a collection of sacred verses and poems.
Adhvaryu:The priest who performs the rituals and chants the mantras from the Yajurveda, which focuses on sacrificial practices.
Udgatri:The priest who recites the hymns from the Samaveda, which are primarily melodic verses drawn from the Rigveda.
Brahma:The priest who is conversant with all three Vedas, but specializes in Atharva veda and coordinates between the other priests
Classification , grouping and detailing of functions for survival of the universe and their leaders - gods- like agni , Surya, varuna, ashwins, vayu,  marut, Indra- MD- , ushas, mother earth, etc. These are called devas. 
Running a village through sabhas and samithis - attendance, attention are discussed.
One can go on talking about rig veda samhita.
The western people twisted rig veda and made the following mischievous statements.
Rig Vedic people were Aryan. There was no evidence of a race called aryans until Germans under nazi rule declared themselves as aryan. So it is a big fraud to call them Indians as European migrants.
Calling Sanskrit as an indo european language is another myth. They couldn't provide evidence of a language from which Sanskrit came. 
Rig veda never talks of Dravidas. It is a British colonial creation. Vedas found mention in Tamil sangam literature. 
They claim Rig Veda is only a number of prayers  to many gods. Another mischief. 
They declare yaga as a sacrifice. 
Hope this enthuses people to read rig Vedic hymns, understand  and follow many values, concepts and principles to become wise. While a hymn may praise a god ,it contains a lot of other information say more than 50% . Why do people ignore those aspects of wisdom in life and say that vedas deal with sacrifices? Is it ignorance or arrogance and hatred?
Don't you think we should teach a version of rig veda highlighting life practices , nature , food, transportation,  energy, values, systems, organizations, health, concentration, phonetics,  language structures, Geology , mathematics , astronomy ?should these not be in the curriculum? Any comments?
Greetings.  Dks
23/03/25, 3:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  661
So we get the following conclusions  from our discussions on religion: 
Religion is not about God and prayers alone. It is a lot more than that. It teaches us how to live with goals and healthy habits and great values as well as  why to live - acquire jnana, help others. 
Religion is an integral part of learning and acquiring knowledge.
Religious literature contains a lot of information on the capacity to learn, problems in learning and methods of learning.
Many literature are philosophical in nature exposing us to humans, society, life ,living and values in a rigorous manner. These expositions are useful in our knowing our roots , our culture and our social history .
Sankaracharya had written extensively on knowledge and learning - acquiring jnana. Viveka Chudamani is an important classic work . Let me quote a few poems or slokas from it. 
11.The realisation of Truth is brought about by discrimination and not in the least by ten million of acts.

12. By adequate reasoning the conviction of the reality about the rope is gained, which puts an end to the great fear and misery caused by the snake worked up in the deluded mind.

13. The conviction of the Truth is seen to proceed from reasoning upon the salutary counsel of the wise, and not by bathing in the sacred waters, nor by gifts, nor by a hundred Pranayamas (control of the vital force).

19. First is viveka - enumerated discrimination between the Real and the unreal; next comes - vairagya- aversion to the enjoyment of fruits (of one's actions) here and hereafter; (next is) the group of six attributes, viz. calmness and the rest; and (last) is clearly the yearning for Liberation.

22. The resting of the mind steadfastly on its Goal (viz. Brahman) after having detached itself from manifold sense-objects by continually observing their defects, is called Shama or calmness.
23. Turning both kinds of sense-organs away from sense-objects and placing them in their respective centres, is called Dama or self-control. The best Uparati or self-withdrawal consists in the mind-function ceasing to be affected by external objects.
24. The bearing of all afflictions without caring to redress them, being free (at the same time) from anxiety or lament on their score, is called Titiksha or forbearance.
25. Acceptance by firm judgment as true of what the Scriptures and the Guru instruct, is called by sages Shraddha or faith, by means of which the Reality is perceived.
26. Not the mere indulgence of thought (in curiosity) but the constant concentration of the intellect (or the affirming faculty) on the ever-pure Brahman, is what is called Samadhana or self-settledness.
Need for self learning and understanding.
51. A father has got his sons and others to free him from his debts, but he has got none but himself to remove his bondage.
52. Trouble such as that caused by a load on the head can be removed by others, but none but one's own self can put a stop to the pain which is caused by hunger and the like.
53. The patient who takes (the proper) diet and medicine is alone seen to recover completely - not through work done by others.
54. The true nature of things is to be known personally, through the eye of clear illumination, and not through a sage: what the moon exactly is, is to be known with one's own eyes; can others make him know it ?
55. Who but one's own self can get rid of the bondage caused by the fetters of Ignorance, desire, action and the like, aye even in a hundred crore of cycles ?
56. Neither by Yoga, nor by Sankhya, nor by work, nor by learning, but by the realisation of one's identity with Brahman is Liberation possible, and by no other means.
Greetings 
Dks
24/03/25, 4:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 662

Kural, a Tamil classic, discusses knowledge in a detailed manner. 
Let me list a few concepts on knowledge given in those couplets. The translator calls the knowledge as wisdom. 

Wisdom is a weapon of defence, An inner fortress no foe can raze.
Wisdom checks the wandering mind And pulls it from ill to good.
. The weapon of wisdom saves one from evil. It is a citadel which cannot be destroyed by the foe.  

This is what Sankara calls viveka- discrimination , the important attribute needed for knowledge. 


Wisdom bridles the wandering mind, keeps it away from evil and bids it tread the right path.  ---- 

Wisdom seeks the truth of all things which are heard or uttered.  

This is a key to convert raw facts into knowledge. 

Wisdom unravels things subtle and seeks them in others.  

This is thinking, intelligence and analysis. 
To be one with the world is wisdom

Reality is knowledge .

Men of foresight who guard themselves against coming events know no distress.  

Here foresight - future prediction is considered as another Requisite to knowledge. 


In his play The Rock (1934) T. S. Eliot already asked the questions, ‘Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?’ and ‘Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?’ Borrowing a famous metaphor from Claude Lévi-Strauss, it may be useful to think of information as raw, while knowledge has been cooked.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
25/03/25, 4:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 663
We got enough information about knowledge. Let us see what knowledge is by consolidating our posts. 
As soon as we are born,  are bombarded with millions of signals every second about our surroundings, people, activities initially and later about neighbours , society and the world. These signals we receive are called data. 
A child picks up a very important tool for learning - observation using its senses - voices, pictures, smells , touch etc. 

It learns the next tool quickly. That is to convert the observed data into information. That is the first level of thinking and processing and understanding. Here, words like milk , sleep, etc are introduced to describe various things to a child . This is the first judgment by a child. The child learns to convert data into information slowly. It recognises mother, other relatives etc. It recognises milk. It learns to cry for milk when hungry.  Even here it may make erroneous judgments. Also it may know words, but the  actual many dimensional characteristics of words will come to it slowly. It may not understand a wall ,it will go and try to go through a wall. It experiments. Over a period of decades ,one gathers millions or billions of pieces of information. One  understands many terms and uses language as a big tool for learning. This continues throughout one's life. Language improves cognition. Still ambiguity remains. The first step in knowing facts is clarity. 
Now, information is still raw. 
But information plays a big role in our life. We build huge belief systems. We are told many facts like:
Fire is dangerous.  Don't go near it. 
Be careful about water. 
Don't touch a hot vessel. Your fingers will burn. 
Don't lift a heavy vessel. 
Don't cry. 
Wash your hands before eating.

All these instructions from parents - a major learning and information source - provides children with a lot of derived information from experience and the child builds a belief system. The belief system is what starts  a person  to become an intelligent one, a knowledgeable one. The belief system starts growing big. You add more information. But it is not a correct system. Fortunately quite a lot of our beliefs are good for normal routine living. 
Another big trait a child picks up is to extend the information and derive new facts. 
A child sees water in a bucket or on tap. When it sees water in a lake , it assumes it can use that water. 
But  It may be erroneous and ambiguous . Let us look at an example. A child was told a snake is dangerous , and instructed to run away while seeing a snake.  
It sees a rope and thinks it is a snake. Even adults make this mistake.
Next question : How does a child gather information?
1.by observation mostly. This goes on throughout one's life. 
2. By instructions from parents. 
3. By communicating with others . 
4 . The most prominent method is questioning. By age 4 , this is an important learning method. Starts with what and then moves on to why. That is the start of thinking and knowledge processing for a child. This process gets refined and changed with time. 

Unfortunately a  child is moulded by a teacher here. This has both good and bad impacts. 

So we have shown that information is not knowledge.  Why?
Information contains erroneous non true facts. 
Only when information is proved to be true , we get knowledge. Information is like a library of books. Can we call the books as knowledge? True, a library may contain some books containing raw data, some with processed data, but they are not understood by a person until a deep and understandable reading takes place and the understood processed information is stored in the brain. . 
Information is raw food. Knowledge is cooked food. Scientific Information is ready to eat food - most scientific information is verified and accepted.
AI today is at a state slightly above this state. AI can sift information from books or other sources , and put relevant facts together. It will do a good job with scientific data as that is almost a verified set of facts. It can do a little derivation to generate new data. 
So we come to the conclusion that 
Knowing a correct and true set of facts and understanding their effects and impacts is knowledge. 
Seeing milk and saying it is milk is not knowledge even though it may be true. Getting the full story of sources of milk, benefits , problems, etc will improve understanding. 
Let us see knowledge acquisition and processing in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
26/03/25, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 664
We are looking at an optimal education system for children . 
We saw how children start learning from childhood. They acquire data through observations and convert them into information. They use observation and language tools to convert data into information and create a large belief system.  But information is not knowledge,  because of many ambiguities and errors. So the question is how information is converted into knowledge.  It is a validation process. 

Like today's ML is doing, children also validate a fact through many hundreds of experiences or elders' advice. They learn from the environment and from peers also before going to school. That is why school education is better than online education. School helps in interactive and group based learning. 
Experiential learning is practised in mathematics and even learning alphabets in schools. 
So you can establish the validity of a fact through studies, analyses, experiments , past experiences and logical reasoning. A person picks up these skills in a school education . Most scientific facts are proven and we just accept them. These will help us to understand a fact. 
Knowledge requires a second requirement - characteristics of a concept and a third requirement - connectivity, derivative facts , impacts. 
Let me take an simple example - water. 
We say we drink water - that is a child's  first fact. Then we see water is used for cooking, washing , taking bath etc. We get new facts. 
Then we ask a question : I need water . Where do I get it from? 
We learn - from wells, canals and rivers or lakes. 
Where do they lakes or rivers get water? 
Now we get a new dimension - from rains. We learn about water falls, floods, etc.
Further enquiry takes us to our getting electricity through hydro projects.
Then we ask - where does waste water from my house goes?. 
That is the direction of creating connected knowledge, learning and understanding.  

The first requirement for learning is thinking. Thinking makes us what we are, what we will be. Thinking helps us at every stage in life - decisions and actions . Thinking leads us to knowledge. Thinking helps us to convert information to knowledge. 
Recently I was in a university.  A young faculty member met me and started talking to me about thinking. I was surprised and happy. We started asking what is thinking. She talked about reasoning. Then I realised that informal understanding of thinking is not enough . That is the weakness of our system. Thinking is the main objective of our education system. 


Today educators have become very interested in teaching ‘thinking skills’ of various kinds in contrast with teaching information and content. 
Most students simply do not pick up the thinking skills in question.
Socrates began this approach to learning over 2,000 years ago, but John Dewey, the American philosopher, psychologist and educator, is widely regarded as the ‘father’ of the modern critical thinking tradition. He called it ‘reflective thinking’ and defined it as: 
“Active, persistent, and careful consideration of a belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds which support it and the further conclusions to which it tends.” 
What this means is - 
Start with curiosity and ask a series of questions to understand correctly and fully a fact. So questioning is integral to thinking. 
We spend our life thinking. It can be at different levels - materialistic level to aspirational and goal oriented levels to innovation levels to intellectual levels.
We think because we want something. 
Thinking is an internal self learning,  self understanding , Self analysis method- somethings explained in detail in upanishads. 

what matters are the reasons we have for believing something and the implications of our beliefs. It is no exaggeration to say that critical thinking attaches huge importance to reasoning, to giving reasons and to evaluating reasoning as well as possible. There is more to it than that, but skilful reasoning is a key element to most formal education. Many aspects like mathematical or analytical thinking, logical thinking, systems thinking, design thinking are picked up later in our higher education. But the basics of multidimensional and multidirectional thinking are not taught. There are many requirements for correct thinking and many hurdles. It is thinking that improves our cognition. 

The American schooling system was started since inception. George Washington, in his Farewell Address to the American people, said: "Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be enlightened."  This is being dismantled now. Hope we don't follow the current examples of the US. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
27/03/25, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 665
Let us define knowledge now.
It is a collection of facts , not a random collection , but a connected collection. So you build a network of connected facts . 
Knowledge is a validated set of facts. Most scientific facts were tested and proven until rejected. Validation is an important step to convert facts into knowledge.
Knowledge is a set of understood facts for each person. Levels of understanding varies and improves with time. We retain a lot of acquired knowledge.  
Humans acquire knowledge throughout their life time. It is called learning. It is both a physical and mental process. There are several methods to acquire knowledge.  Education is one of them. 
One can derive new knowledge by modifying existing knowledge or discovering new facts. So our individual knowledge base is expanding with time .
There are several ways of testing facts to validate facts and understand them. The simplest is experiential , and then we have several methods to validate. Philosophers discuss and analyse several approaches. They use mostly logical reasoning. Scientists use both experimental and mathematical reasoning. 
Reasoning is basic to validate and understand our knowledge. 
The first step to reasoning is questioning every fact - what, why, how, where, etc. 
All knowledge one gathers is not usable. But quite a good amount is usable. 
What do we use our  knowledge for -  to learn good habits, to know what is good and what is bad, to be polite , to know what to eat and how to behave, to build friendships, to converse meaningfully with others, to question and find answers, to solve problems, to use mathematics, to decide  logically , to know the country and world, to apply your knowledge to develop or improve many gadgets and technologies, to innovate , to analyse and to get a job. The most important use is to improve our intelligence level and sharpen our mind. A person's effectiveness is determined by how he uses his or her knowledge, what is the purpose of its use - make money, help others, satisfy curiosity , build the nation. A life is fulfilled if one puts one's knowledge for the use of not only himself and his family but also for the betterment of the society. One gets immense satisfaction when one helps the society with his knowledge.  
We acquire knowledge from many sources . The initial step is by  observing people and their behaviour , society, offices, nature , social functions, etc. Then we learn from others. We listen to a large number of people. We argue with a lot of people. The most important source is by reading a large number of books and gathering information.  It is a big source. Education in schools and colleges is another important source to acquire Knowledge.  

Let us see learning in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
28/03/25, 4:31 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 666
Let me ask a philosophical question - why do we need knowledge? Why this quest or thirst for knowledge. ?
You see evidence for this from Socretes , Plato and our Vedic and upanishadic scholars. So it is a constant feature of human life. Knowledge and living are intertwined.  
This quest is there from the beginning in order  to live . Knowledge took us through many stages of development.  
The stages of life are- there are seven stages developed as Spiral Dynamics  by Don E. Beck and Cristopher Cowan, based on the pioneering work of developmental psychologist Clare W. Graves. They are 

1.The instinctive self - to survive first 
2. The Magical Self wants safety and security. It is tribalistic, magical, and mystical. Looks to gods and higher powers with rituals for protection.
3.The Impulsive Self
The Impulsive Self drives for power, glory, rage, and revenge. It is egocentric, exploitative, impulsive, and rebellious. The Impulsive Self believes it can take what it wants by aligning with power.

The basic theme of the Impulsive Self is “Be what you are and do what you want, regardless.”
4. The Rule/Role Self seeks the ultimate peace, locked in the battle of good and evil. It is absolutistic, obedient, purposeful, and authoritarian. By following the rules and exceeding its given role, it will know the fundamental truth. Most religions and religious values are rooted in this stage.

The theme of the Rule/Role Self is that “Life has meaning, direction, and purpose with predetermined outcomes.”
5. The Achiever Self desires autonomy, achievement, and self-interest. It is materialistic, strategic, ambitious, and individualistic.

The purpose of the game is to compete and win: material pleasure, acquisition, and the advancement of civilization. How? By learning how to excel at everything it does, setting and achieving goals, measuring success, and so on.

The Achiever Self builds businesses, science, medicine, and most of modern society. It creates hierarchies of domination (comparisons, “better than,” etc.). Orange became the dominant wave during the Industrial Age and continues through the technological and information age.

The primary theme of the Achiever Self is to “act in your self-interest by playing the game to win.”

6.The Sensitive Self lives by connection, community, egalitarianism, and consensus. It is relativistic, personalistic, pluralistic, and sensitive. Green appreciates diverse views and focuses on the needs of the many.

The underlying theme of the Sensitive Self is to “seek peace within the inner self and explore the caring dimensions of community.”

7. The integral self seeks to become whole and synthesize all the levels that came before it by awakening as many lines of intelligence as it can and integrating them into a cohesive whole. It is systemic, ecological, flexible, and conceptual. By learning and adapting, it can incorporate the levels that came before it.

The primary theme of the integral self is to “live fully and responsibly as what you are and are learning to become.”
Integral theory realised that unified theory pursued by scientists earlier is not the correct approach. So they call this theory the theory of everything. Ken werber has written a book on this , simple to read. 
8. The Holistic Self
Compassion and harmony guide this level.It seeks peace in an incomprehensible world by developing a more profound receptivity of multi-dimensional perspectives without privileging any of them.

The main theme of the Holistic Self is to “experience the wholeness of existence through mind and spirit.”
This stage brings together science and mystery , east and west philosophies.  

You see these levels and concepts were achieved through awareness, knowledge , self understanding and maturity. 
These stages can be identified with human traits as
Survival: individual survival (masculine)
Protection: tribal (feminine)
Power: power and dominance (masculine)
Rule/Role: follows moral precepts of the group (feminine)
Achievement: autonomy and achievement (masculine)
Sensitivity: egalitarianism and community (feminine)
Integration: integration and personal responsibility (masculine)
Holism: collective individualism (feminine)
According to this research, only approximately 1% of individuals are integrated.
80 percent of individuals have a center of gravity in either Rule/Roles, Achievement, or Sensitivity.
These percentages help explain interoffice, political, and marital conflicts.

All these seven traits can be seen in people. All are not at one uniform level. People moving to higher levels obtain greater intelligence and apply their knowledge effectively. They acquire knowledge throughout their life. They lead an intellectual life.
Any comments?
Let us continue further in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
29/03/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 667

To understand the linking of knowledge and life further , let us ask 
Who is a human?
The Spiral Dynamics uses an evolutionary approach. It does not describe the stages of mental / consciousness development. Most psychologists do not talk about knowledge development but about levels of consciousness. The levels are
Perception and basic understanding of life . Mostly have local level knowledge. 
Literate level - command on language and speaking , reasonable understanding, reading , writing and mathematics is known. primary school level
Normal thinking and reasoning level 
Emotion and ego management level 
Knowledge application level - adaptable and having good learning capabilities
Emotion control level, mature state, move above materialism
Knowledge generation level - inventions , research , futuristic Thinking. 
Wisdom level. 
Spiritual level
Let me look at our yogic approach - a very detailed explanation of humans as many tattvas are described in upanishads, yoga sutra and mahabharata.  
First, 
The human body has three bodies where all these five koshas reside. They are Gross body (Sthula sharira) (स्थुल शरीर), Subtle body or Astral Body (Linga sharira) (लिंग शरीर) and Causal body (Karana sharira) (कारण शरीर). The gross body or Sthula sharira is the physical body.
According to yoga philosophy, we are not just our physical body or mind, we are holistic, multi-dimensional beings made up of many different, interactive levels.

In the yoga framework, these levels are referred to as the five sheaths of our being or the Five Koshas.
The first is Annamayakosha is our physical body, the most familiar aspect of our being. 
The second is Pranamayakosha -The Energy body.
According to yoga therapy traditions, this is the second layer of our being. Prana means energy, but not energy in the usual Western meaning of the word. Rather, prana is the life force, the vital energy that flows through and enlivens all our physical systems. The breath is the most physical expression of prana, and prana is closely related to the breath.
Third is  Manamayakosha -The Mental -Emotional body
Manas means mind, and the Manamayakosha is the layer of our being expressed as mind, emotions, and feelings. These are the mental faculties with which we absorb, process, and interpret input from our lives .
Mind is subdivided into Manas, ahamkara, chitta and buddhi. 
Fourth sheath is Vijnanamayakosha -The Wisdom body
The fourth kosha is considered part of the subtle body. Vijnana means knowing, and this sheath represents the higher mind, the faculty of wisdom, which lies underneath the processing, thinking, and reactive mind. This is the level of our being that has the higher wisdom to guide us through life and lead us to higher and higher levels of truth and integration. It represents the reflective aspects of our consciousness, which allow us to experience a deeper insight into ourselves and the world around us.
The fifth sheath is Anandamayakosha -The Bliss body.
This is the fifth and final sheath of our being. Ananda means bliss, not bliss in the sense of emotions, such as happiness or pleasure, but an expanded, unbounded experience of reality. The ancients viewed the experience of the Bliss body as an experience of the deepest level of our being, an unbounded, blissful state of peace, joy, and love.
There is another way of looking at humans. 
Humans have four realms. 
One realm or avatar is physical - basic wants or needs to be met. We need knowledge to survive, get wealth, and be healthy. We need to know how. This needs knowledge. 
Second realm is emotional. We live our life with a lot of emotions. Some like love, affection are good. Some like anger ,worry are to be avoided. Some are neutral.  We need knowledge for training our emotions and controlling them. 
Third is mental. This is where knowledge plays a dominant role to invent, to control, to be safe, to become an intellectual. This phase makes us realise - what is life? An integral view , a holistic view should be evolved based not on separate entities like house, property, family, job , society etc, but the interconnections and interrelationships amongst many existing and futuristic entities, their impacts. This understanding is vital and this changes our approaches completely. Our upanishads concentrated on the proper growth, and understanding and proper use of mind. Materialism is called a myth. Today psychologists call for empathy as the world is becoming highly self centred ,competitive,  money motivated and consumption based. 

The fourth realm of a human is spiritual. Here we go beyond our perceived reality - into cosmos, into unknowns, into the mysteries, into evolutions , Into the theory of everything.  
A good human should strive to reach upto the third level - to become an intelligent person . Even the third level has many sublevels. We need to climb them. 
It will be very great if we reach the fourth ,the spiritual level to become a holistic self. 
Our upanishads preach that we aim for the spiritual self. 
Human is an integral and living entity growing with intelligence - consciousness- through constant learning. You can even say
“Knowledge is human.”
Greetings 
Dks
30/03/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 668
Mr Gurumurthy has a question:
“Interesting. 

Sir, what does Research show about the path that human consciousness takes to evolve from the instinctive self level in awareness to the holistic level of one integrated whole Awareness? 

Do all human beings follow a preset hierarchical path or can they jump steps?”

My understanding - 
The first aspect is the evolution of consciousness in humans started slowly with perception and moved up the ladder. While it looks surprising that upanishads like Katha upanishad, kena upanishad , Brihadaranyaka upanishad etc  talked about mind and consciousness in a serious way in say 500 BCE,  the west didn't accept those concepts till 15th centuryCE. The obsession with mind , learning, consciousness continued in India till around 15 th century in a big way - understanding consciousness was considered the main purpose of life- , our interest reduced and the western intellectual pursuit increased. 
Most importantly , the objective of my writing these models of humans is to see how we become more conscious . That should be the objective of our education and learning system. That is to make people aspire for not material prosperity but intellectual prosperity. I had a chat with a young boy recently and told him to become an intellectual being and not an engineer or doctor or IFS officer. Our children's primary aim should be getting a strong intellectual foundation - not just during school days but even beyond. I was telling him that till the mid thirties in age ,i was focusing on the processes of sharpening my intellect. Doing a graduation, taking a job are needed, but one should spend half the time on intellectual pursuit.
The question of how one goes up the consciousness ladder is important. I was leading towards that. It has many steps and stages : The first one is calming the mind - meditate, do yoga, practice music, listen to good things, understand your culture . 
The second step is to start thinking . It is an essential step for cognition. Don't just listen, ask questions, look deeper, etc. This is a crucial step before acquiring knowledge.  The third step is the preparation step for learning. Learn methods for concentration and practice. Good examples are recite prayers , practice music, read for an hour a good book and spend ten minutes remembering and  thinking about what you read, write on some aspects, observe nature , sun, water sources, river flows, plants, animals for atleast half an hour , draw and paint for an hour etc. Don't scold your child if it spends a lot of time drawing pictures. This step is a boon for developing a child - creating a binding to life in a child and creating deep interest. I saw this evolving in my grandson.  The fourth step - the most difficult step - is understanding your levels of emotions ,their effects and controlling them. This may take constant thinking and take a long time. The fifth step is an early step of developing good habits . 
Upto this level is a normal behaviour and normally doable by people. Then comes the  significant step . The sixth step is learning , thinking, building capabilities and building intellectual strength. The next two steps are desirable but need a lot of effort. The seventh step  is ego- ahamkara- reduction to removal, a tough step. That will lead to the next step - eighth - empathy, and compassion - I call this humanism. Those who cultivate intellectualism can reach upto this level. The ninth step is reduce wants, don't expect results , perform nishkama karma.  One is now ready for the tenth step - spiritualism. 
The fourth point is do we follow all the steps? Yes. No skipping of any step. but we can do them in parallel,  not in a sequence. Start at an early age. Humans are multidimensional, and can do many things or activities in a long productive day of 10 hours. If you start being lazy, then that leads to intellectual disaster.  We are capable of  achieving a higher level of consciousness. This has been proved by the spiral dynamics.  Everyone should strive for it. The parental, societal and educational support in providing an intellectual strength to a child is lacking now. Support for formal education is there but not intellectual upgradation.The colonial materialistic outlook is strong. One should love one's children, but one shouldn't pity him or her, push them to work hard, think hard, read more . Pity is dangerous. Similarly pushing too hard and too much is not good. Most important - expectations - don't expect nobel prize from your child. Be a good assessor of your children's capabilities.  
I am sure many will disagree with the above statements and even curse me. Welcome comments. 
Thanks Gurumurthy 
Greetings 
Dks
30/03/25, 8:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Wish you ,your family and friends a great happy yugadi.  Let us have bevu Bella to remind us that life has its ups and downs. But it continues in a great way. Just keep moving , your problems will find solutions with your efforts and help from others. Let us pray for tha happiness and prosperity of all. 
Greetings 
Dks
31/03/25, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 669
Let me get back to   learning.
Let us use a story to know two levels of learning? 
The story goes like this:
There was a king in a place. His personal assistant was complaining regularly that the king was giving a high salary to his minister, and the minister didn't seem to be working hard,but he, the assistant  was working hard and got  a very low salary. That was unfair. The king wanted to explain the situation to the assistant through a concrete example. 
He saw a palanquin coming into the city one day. He called his assistant to find out who was coming. The assistant ran ,got an answer , came back and told the king that a swami was coming. The king asked his assistant where he was coming from. The assistant ran ,got the answer, returned and told the king. The king wanted to know where he would be staying. The assistant again ran , now a longer distance and returned with the answer. The king wanted to know the duration of stay. The assistant ran a much longer distance and came back with an answer. Similarly the king asked a few more questions. The assistant ran a long distance everytime and returned with answers . He was tired of running. 
After some time, the king asked his minister to get details of the person who was coming in a palanquin in the morning. The minister went, gathered all the information about the swami, who was he, where was he from, what was  his purpose and duration of visit, what would be his activities in the city , how many were with the swami etc. 
The minister told the complete details to the king. The king asked the assistant, “ Do you see why I pay a high salary to the minister ? “ . The assistant was a dumb person with no thinking. The minister knew what questions to ask based on what information the king wanted and collected complete information. That needed thinking and that is the process of higher cognitive learning- the minister built the knowledge base without the king's prompts. This differentiation should be understood by us . We should develop our processes accordingly by creating 10 to 20 such situations and asking children to generate knowledge bases. They think and learn. Don't give them ready to eat textbook information.  That won't make them to  think independently.  

Let me look next at
What is the primary purpose of learning?
 Acquisition of knowledge, understanding the knowledge , applying knowledge in one's life and solving problems and managing one's life situations may be  called learning. We learn constantly  from our expectations, actions,  advices, readings , experiences and mistakes. 

Learning is a simple word with a lot of implications. The question is do we learn?
Most of us read history - I didn't say study- . We pass the exams. But what did we understand from the history - moguls are the great rulers in India ,  a brainwashing done by our historians and school books. More importantly , what did we learn from Indian history for 2000 years? That is the sad part. We learnt nothing . We don't even get a picture of this country and how it meandered over thousands of years. We didn't talk about culture, people's lives, habits, scholarships, migrations . We talk about fights between kings. Are kings or rulers the only constituents of a society?
similarly we read newspaper stories or books a lot. That is a useful activity. But how much do we remember and understand from what we read? What did we learn from all the books we read?   Same situation applies for many subjects taught in schools. Let me give one example of not  learning relevant aspects and applying them . Children learn in their third standard or so that air is needed for combustion- oxygen from air combines with a fuel to create a fire. The same child sees the  cooking activity  at home in a traditional wood stove. Did a child  tell its mother that firewood is not getting oxygen and so the fire goes out. It may see the mother blowing air into the fire. But no improvements are thought of. That is where thinking comes. Learning is not just memorising separate facts . It is understanding and applications. It is to know the connectivity between various entities - physical to spiritual. 
More in the next post
Greetings 
Dks
01/04/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 670
Let me continue with more features of learning. 
Learning is not a collection of facts ,but understanding and cognition of reality and applying knowledge to improve life . Learning should improve thinking and questioning capabilities .  This is a very important statement. 
Learning has a primary focus - the first step to learning  is a set of skills to improve cognition, not gaining knowledge . These are clarity of mind - obtained through yoga, concentration- meditation, good health- exercises , good habits , internal learning , and thinking skills. All these are normally innate but ignored or not used. These  can be learnt and acquired. After this important motivational  first step, we continue with many skills to improve cognition - discrimination - known as viveka- of right and wrong , good and bad, useful or useless, good for me or good for all ,  etc, analysis, reasoning, discussions, reading and critiquing, acquiring external knowledge,  and regular practices to assess one's knowledge capabilities.  This should be the focus for the entire schooling period. But parents play a crucial role here. Parents' behaviour affects the children. The base for all activities of learning and cognition is thinking. 
Learning has many subcomponents- learn, unlearn, relearn, learn throughout life etc. Methods of learning are changing now. 
Let us ask what is the knowledge stage of learning?
learning aids the process of knowledge acquisition, knowledge processing and assimilation . We apply the processed knowledge to decide, to analyse ,to solve problems occuring in our  life and in jobs and to invent something  new .  It is intended to know various aspects of life, living, habits etc. Its purpose is  to acquire relevant knowledge to survive and grow in the world in harmony with others - people, animals, plants, forests, water sources, nature, resources , etc . While knowledge acquisition is considered important and given attention by educators, philosophers and psychologists, and it itself consists of many learning steps, we have more stages in learning before it becomes intelligence. Remember knowledge is not intelligence.  
Acquiring knowledge is not enough. Application of knowledge is not simple. Our entire engineering activities depend on the application of knowledge to improve our societal functioning. That is again a major concern but without holistic understanding . This higher level analysing , applicative and integrated knowledge makes one relevant in today's AI world. 

Learning in the early days was mostly a strong internal process - observing the happenings in our surroundings and perceiving facts -that  we call information today. One transmitted to his family what he learnt in his lifetime.  At that time,  he became  a teacher and initiated external learning.  Still most people used internal processes to learn - say learnt how to make fire, how and why to cook, how to make and use tools etc. Farmers learnt from others' experiments and results. 
We see strong evidence of external learning from a guru - in our vedas. We learnt from rishis. But vedas emphasized internal learning also. But over a period of millenia, we moved to more external learning and less internal learning . We think that learning happens in schools and colleges. Are we becoming morons? Are we becoming slaves of external influences of powerful groups? We should improve our internal learning. 
Internal learning is still strong in many children. But it has to be cultivated. 
Children show interest in learning only if they know the reason Why they are learning a topic. 
Most children find what is taught is irrelevant , not relatable , not understandable and useless. So a teacher or parent should concentrate on  the why part of learning more seriously than what part. When a child refuses to drink milk,  the mother cajols it , tells reasons, stories to the child to make it drink milk or eat food. 18.  Most teaching ignores the why part. 
What is the function of the most important question - why? It helps children develop reasoning methods. More importantly, whether we like it or not, it builds judgmental capabilities. Judgmental capabilities are at a higher level to reasoning. They provide us solutions and compromises in life. Judgmental characteristics may be very rigid or rigid or empathetic or , relative or flexible. There are many shades. Most of us don't learn these formally. We don't understand how our Judgments will make us a moron or a scholar, a success or a failure, a leader or a follower etc. They help in cognition. 
19. How do we learn? We initially learn partly by observation and mostly from external sources - parents to books to TV. As we start growing and acquiring more information , we use our mind to analyse the information and we create a good picture of our knowledge. We start a good cognition process. At this point of time , learning becomes a push pull process. We get some knowledge from various external sources like teachers, family, society which is  pushed into us. But there is an important pull transformation that happens at this point in time. We start learning by internal thinking and analysis. This is self learning - swadhyaya. I saw my grandson using this strong internal pull process strongly and very effectively at the age of four itself. He was more knowledgeable than others including his teachers. That is an important transformation in one's life. Some may miss it. Some get it naturally. But it can be cultivated. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
02/04/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 671
Let me discuss more aspects on learning. 
20. How do we cultivate the pull process of learning and skepticism to the push process of teaching?
 The first and very critical requirement is ambience created by parents and school for children. Parents play a big role in building up their children. In today's uncertain , volatile , ambiguous and complex situation - known as VUCA world of the 21st century-, parent's roles have increased .Parental intelligent and adaptive guidance is needed by children. How many can be competent. Parents need education on this. Counselling by others is not a solution. 
One of the important things a parent should understand is the answer to the important question -  what should a child learn in today's VUCA world. 
This means we should know the changes that happened between the 20th and 21st century  and the requirements of the 21st century. I will discuss these aspects later. 
But do the parents do their job of creating a proper ambience correctly?
Parents think children don't know anything. And they believe that Children shouldn't know many things - taboo. They feel that  Children should obey their orders. These assumptions are incorrect and this is where everything goes wrong.
Parents should exercise their attention on their children and do things that are beneficial for their children. But they should treat children as knowledgeable individuals  , not as morons, explain situations and convince the children on habits and practices. They should motivate learning by first becoming good learners. 

 What do I mean by ambience ? It means a large number of factors. Peaceful and pleasant atmosphere in the home is the first step. Many children miss this basic step in India . Most households have a stressful , worrisome atmosphere. That destroys a child's interest and motivation.  
21. The second aspect of ambience is acquiring good habits - to be clean, to pray , to meditate and do yoga, to eat properly nutritious food, to be frugal , to be regular , to read , to work hard- if parents are lazy the children will follow them-,  to observe, to ask questions, to get interested to know about our neighbourhood and nature, to appreciate nature, and to follow certain best practices known as sadachara. It is a big list. Many houses follow these practices at different levels. Many good families discard these in the name of wokism. 
 22. The third aspect of ambience is very important - independence  for children to explore, to do their tasks, to decide on their daily activities,  to know the world , to be friendly with others, to create friendships, to go and buy things for themselves etc. 
23. The fourth aspect of ambience is injecting responsibility in children . Allow them to take care of themselves - from getting up early, to bathing ,to getting ready , to finishing  homework, to doing exercises, to reading and writing , to discussing many issues, to buying groceries and vegetables for the house etc. This brings in maturity in children. I have seen my daughter taking  responsibility to take care of her younger brother when she was five years of age. That was good. 
24. The fifth aspect is freedom. Children lack freedom. They are controlled by their parents. They are disciplined by schools. They are not allowed to ask questions, to talk and take part in discussions, are expected to display good behaviour . We convert them into morons. Get out of this discipline fix . Know when to exercise control, when to give freedom to children. Allow them enough freedom to feel happy and counted as part of the family.  Release them from the jail of discipline and blind love. 
25. Knowledge acquisition is a constant process to be made into a habit and used throughout one's life. One can improve the acquisition process or ignore it. This makes a person what he or she is, what he or she will become, what he or she will achieve in life . It will determine what he or she be doing in life -  will help the society, will be a burden to the society, will change the society. So this is crucial to be told to every child so that they decide what will be their future course, how to reach it and how they want to become an intellectual or a concerned person or a normal also ran person. It will make one decide the achievements he or she wants in life. Then one can decide on actions needed for what one wants to achieve. This is what we call goals. Unfortunately, most people today have materialistic goals - earn money, buy a house, travel to many countries - this is a common ambition for most. So the children were forced to prepare for IITs admissions. That is not the only route. 
26. We should look for intellectual goals - what aspects of knowledge i need to acquire, how do I acquire in depth knowledge , how do i build habits to analyse acquired knowledge, how do I sharpen my thinking and reasoning power, how do I use the acquired knowledge to help others and society and how do I do create new knowledge.  That should be our goal. If these aspects are articulated properly, children accept it and follow an intellectual thinking path away from the mechanical job and money path. 
Let us continue further.
Greetings 
Dks
03/04/25, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 672 

My last point in the previous post gave an important purpose in life - to become an intellectual . What does this mean?
When many people succeed in life with STEM education and many succeed with programming , the question arises - why don't I follow that path. A very important question that should not be ignored.  I didn't say don't go for STEM learning.  But i say do it intellectually to make a meaning and purpose out of your life .
Children should be allowed to  start contemplating from age five onwards or age 10 onwards - what should my life be ? What aspects will satisfy me?etc.  A lot of guidance is needed. 
First they should know the options . 
1.a mechanical life - a job, get money, acquire family and properties , struggle with daily needs , and life looking for stability and running away from changes and challenges, a life defying the behaviour of the changing world. 
This has a danger - you become a moron, get bored with life . 
But most opt for this mechanical life. 
They think it is safe - but it was true for your parents but not for your children- 
In the VUCA world of today, they may loose jobs and face crises. I have seen hundreds of such cases. So you need a better option - what is called an intellectual option .
Before I go into the intellectual option , let's ask what happens in one's life and job today?  
Routine clerical life is gone. No routine jobs now. 
What is  the reality of life  -  not just jobs alone. 
We face problems of health and finance  and crises , face unexpected situations, even disasters , face unknown situations - all these may happen in one's family life and professional life. We need to plan, manage and act through correct , good and futuristic decisions. That is the reality. So What  should one do ? You can’t run away. 
What you should do is to solve the problems to the best of your ability. That is where the qualities like calm mind, thinking , analysing, understanding and most importantly anticipating the problems before they occur- a future gazing - helps. Acquiring and practising these traits is what I call intellectualism.  These are life skills , not mathematics , science etc . Of Course you need them as secondary skills. Once you have the primary skills, you get the secondary skills easily. That is what happened for me. 
We need these traits. They are not easy to learn in a class. They need a lot of internal learning and lots of practice
If basic intellectual traits are well developed in a person, he or she can face life's problems confidently, take decisions correctly , help others, develop themselves and their society and build a satisfactory and successful life . So that should be the primary  focus for everyone, not engineering, IITs or computers. 
We need to embrace change rather than seek stability. "Instead of 'challenging myself within stability,' we should learn to 'create value within change.’
In order to understand this new trait called intellectualism, let me go back and look at Life in the early to mid part of the 20th century. It can give us many lessons. 
life was peaceful, because wants were minimal and there were no big aspirations. 
Many people lived their life  in two or three dimensions . What are these dimensions? One is materialistic dimension of earning money and managing the family within means . Second is the religious - dharmic -  dimension or traditional dimension. Believe in values followed by our forefathers , be pious , be regular , be calm , be helpful etc. Many people followed these two dimensions without any difficulty. They managed life well. The third dimension is the social dimension. Get involved with public activities, help in improving public infrastructure and facilities and help poor people. Educating others and advising people is also part of the third dimension.  There is also a fourth dimension.  A few people moved into a higher spiritual domain. 
How did many manage two or three dimensions? Their organized mind and time management were great. That worked for them. I had a great inspiration at my young age of five years. My uncle lived in the three dimensions. I watched his activities, his decisions, his organization, his calm analytical mind and his support ,help and advices to many people. He was my mentor. Silence was his way of teaching me , not anger or shouting.  I was always with him for more than 14 years , observed him, and followed his methods systematically. That helped me. 
Scholarship was recognized and respected greatly. It is true now also. 
The biggest advantage of that period was stability , no changes , no adaptations to technologies. 
People didn't have an opportunity for higher education in those days.   Most had only school education. So people believed that life is a great teacher and I should learn from life, neighbours , not depend upon schools or ChatGPT.  Remember cut and paste will not solve problems encountered in our life. Forget cut and paste solutions. Today we need to go back and follow that idea - life is the biggest teacher, not schools. 

To conclude , I am not suggesting we go back in time and follow our elders. But learn how they lived  and apply your intellectualism to solve the unexpected,  complex problems that will appear almost everyday in our life and just  not solving problems of today, but those occurring in the future- anticipate future.
Greetings 
Dks
04/04/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 673
We feel that It is necessary for a child to be intellectually motivated. 
For becoming an intellectually strong person , what is required is thinking skills to be acquired as a habit first. Thinking needs  a questioning mindset. We need to encourage children to ask questions and even solve puzzles with them. The opposite is happening now. Please wake up . 
Let me ask - what is a mindset?
A child starts acquiring a lot of information from observations and from parents and others. Using this information and parents' advice, it forms opinions. parents say do this ,don’t do this, this is good, this is bad, don’t talk to him, etc. This process of forming opinions builds thousands of beliefs in every child. Beliefs may be correct or wrong , true or false , desirable or undesirable , simple or complex, generic or specific.  That is a major form of mind development. This set of beliefs guides the thinking and actions of a child and determines his or her capabilities. A child becomes a human with these beliefs. Genetics and tradition  also play a role in this formation of beliefs. This set of beliefs and opinions  is called a mindset.
A fixed mindset is the belief that your intelligence and abilities are unchangeable. Its antithesis, a growth mindset, is the belief that your intelligence and abilities can change over time as a result of new experiences. The belief in a growth mindset is a belief that individuals can purposefully change their circumstances through hard work, practice, or training.
So our job is to build an open and thinking and changing mindset. Contemplation and questioning should be taught and encouraged leading to self learning and understanding. 
This is a tough task. Who should do this?
Schools?
Unfortunately no as seen from the following two comments. 
Technology developments were not many in 20th century. Electricity happened in the beginning of the century. It brightened life. It helped households , offices and industries. Developmental focus was on manufacturing the needs of people like metals, machines, tools, textiles, coal, power generation, paper, household appliances ,  consumer goods and processed foods. The entire century focused on manufacturing. So jobs were mostly in the industry sector. Our education was tailored to meet these needs. 
In  the 1880s, when the movement toward compulsory schooling began in the US,  some railroad magnates opposed public education
for fear that they would lose the workers who did the hardest jobs,clearing roadbeds and laying track. However, the first U.S. Commi-
ssioner of Education, William Torrey Harris, reassured railway baron Ellis Huntington that the emerging American public education system was “scientifically designed not to overeducate” but to produce socially compliant workers.
In his book, Harris wrote these highly depressing but also very influential words:
“Ninety-nine [students] out of a hundred are automata, careful to walk in prescribed paths, careful to follow the prescribed custom. This is not an accident but the result of substantial education, which, scientifically defined, is the subsumption of the individual.” Macauley followed the same strategy in India- to produce non thinking, non analysing clerks. 

Thomas Edison also  noticed: “Somewhere between the ages of eleven and fifteen, the average child begins to suffer from an atrophy, the paralysis of curiosity and the suspension of the power to observe.
The trouble I should judge to lie with the schools.”
But today is the era of constant change , adaptation and innovation. We need to change our children's learning behaviours and mindsets , and shift them from rote mechanical learning to open , inquisitive , skeptical and deep thinking and contemplating learning leading to unknowns. It is my opinion that our education's focus on known topics  in our teaching should be reduced to 50% and remaining time spent on unexplained concepts, impacts , open questions, future trends and sharpening our mind. 
So it is the responsibility of parents to develop an open thinking mindset in children ,an essential requirement for an intellectual mind. 
Greetings
Dks
05/04/25, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 674
Let us enlarge the purpose of learning. We saw that we acquire knowledge through learning. Then we saw that knowledge is not enough, it has to be applied properly . Then we discussed that intellectualism is an important objective to learn. It makes our life great and meaningful. Now I want to look at other aspects of life. 
I said a human being is built with a lot of accumulated beliefs that are used in day to day activities, problem solving and deciding on many situations. Now let me look at the  characteristics acquired by people , some good , some bad, some desirable , some disastrous. A person is made up of beliefs , habits and many other characteristics.  
A human being builds a number of characteristics in his life. What are these - let me list a few. 
The first one we saw is the capacity to learn- acquire knowledge.
That needs some traits- observation, perception, questioning , reasoning , analysing , thinking , cognition . These are mental habits. 
Another essential characteristic, we acquire is:
Trust - it is the most difficult trait . Trust is a part of your mindset. Some don't trust anyone. Some trust everyone. But we can't live without trust. Trust builds relationships,  friendships and supports life. A woman marries a man on trust . Trust is not easily definable. Each one has a method of trusting others. One also has different levels of trust with respect to a person and the nature of the task.  You may trust some one to post an ordinary  letter  , but you may post an important letter yourself and don't trust that person. You may trust someone to give a loan of a few thousand rupees, but may not give a loan of a lakh of rupees. But one thing  is certain that we live as a society , meet many people in our life , have financial or property dealings, build partnerships etc- all these are based on trust. Zero trust in human life has restrictive meaning. Trust has two actors - people is one actor. your trust with other people - known, unknown, well known, relatives, etc - varies from person to person based on many factors - how long do you know him?, is he or she reliable ? Will he or she be able to do a job for you ? . 
The second aspect is the tasks that you entrust with a person. You may give a small low risk jobs to any person. But jobs with risks, you will be careful with your decision. You just don't go by trust alone but build checks and be cautious. 
Trust happens with experience. We build life long friendships based on trust. 
Trust is not a simple thing. Businesses run on trust. They succeed or get ruined because of good or misplaced trust. A mechanic in a factory is entrusted with a costly machine. 
A large company or bank trusts an IT services company like TCS with a operations critical for the survival of the company. 
We select a CEO of a company based on trust on a person - his or her competence . All selections for senior positions are based on a set of assessments and the decider trusts his wisdom. 

I should say that I lived my life and succeeded in everything I did , almost every major task , because of my trust in others and their trust in me. It is not just people to people , but with colleges, governments, industries, banks also. I handled purchases worth hundreds of crores - that was the trust established between me and the companies. 
To me, trust is the essence of myself. I value it even now. Society has millions of people to help you in dire need . Have faith in your society . I may keep away from getting closely involved with society,  but appreciate the actions of our society. Judgment is another trait we need to build a trust with people. Trust and judgment gives us maturity. 
Trust is not a simple process. It is a complicated mental judgmental activity , not arrived at one instance but decided based on several factors - observations of the behaviours of people, dependability of people , others experiences, references - most visit restaurants or choose hotels  based on remarks, many don't trust airindia based on comments of others  - , discussions and assessments etc. 
Trust is a complicated entity. It is a two way process - you trust someone and you expect some others to trust you. Trust has many levels - implicit, good, competence, helpful, low risk , no trust. Trust depends on and built through observations, perceptions, remembrances,  experiences and failures due to mistrust. Trust depends on many aspects in life.  Many times we trust strangers . I have gone through all these stages. 
As I said before I first built my trust in others and gained their trust and we all benefitted mutually. Mostly I established my capabilities , truthfulness, my strengths ,my judgment capacity and sincerity with others before I gained their trust. One sided trust doesn't work. Both persons should have trust and it should reflect in actions beneficial to both. I didn't go for a quid pro quo approach. Let me explain the roles trust played in my life next. Let me assure you that trust is significant for me. It made me who I am. 
Greetings 
Dks
06/04/25, 4:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  675
Let me explain my experiences in learning and societal relationships. 
First the ambience aspect particularly during the first 10 years. The ambience did play a major role in my acquiring habits and characteristics. 
I lived in a village for the first ten years of my life - and simple, spartan , frugal life. It was a period of pre independence and just after independence. The village was on the national highway in southern part of India about 40 km north of   Kanyakumari , close to or part of western ghats . It had a reasonable population. 
I lived with my grandmother and studied in the village school upto 5th standard.  My uncle living in Tirunelveli, the district headquarters,  used to visit us frequently ,almost every week and he will be in the village during the summer vacations. My parents and grandfather lived in a devakottai,  a city about 200 km from our village . So I was in the care of my grandmother mostly. But my elder uncle 
took care of my learnings. He was my mentor and played a big role in my upbringing.  
Life was simple , spartan and frugal. It was just around the last stage of the second world war and there was a big scarcity of commodities. So frugal living was necessary. 
People were simple. Life was simple. Simple  Food- rice , pulses, vegetables- was available. Most were happy. 
The situation was highly motivated due to the fight for independence and highly idealistic to build the nation. There was no corruption even in the sub registrar's office. Activities moved smoothly. 
As I said, life was moving around the three dimensions- jobs,society, religion. So I had to follow the three dimensions and learn from all three.
I first learnt that routineness in daily activities like getting up at 5 am , getting ready by 7am is very important and helpful. Then I learnt a lot of dos and don'ts.  That started my thinking process- why ? I realised - some dos and don'ts like - don't shout, be polite, help others, don't waste food, don't skip eating etc could be explained , but some others like pray in the morning and evening, could not be explained. But i understood the don'ts if not the logic , but the advantages and benefits. This kind of maturity was built up from my childhood itself. It was due to the ambience.


I realised that when I do  something in ways  that are not acceptable to elders , they - my grandmother or uncle-  told me directly. But most other things ,I had to learn by myself - that is self learning . This is a big revelation. My bringing up gave me certain freedom to learn by myself. 
How did I start learning by myself? By keen observations and understanding.  
So i started observing every activity in the home, outside, temple, tank etc and getting to know correct behaviours from others. So these experiences helped me to decide - what are good habits? 
I had a straight algorithm .
Some friend or a child does something and gets scolded . I decided - don't do such things. One common habit of senior people is that they didn't like children talking a lot. So I decided to reduce talking and also decided to listen a lot. It is being followed by me even now. It helped me. 
Regarding my observations , I created opportunities. I listened to a lot of discussions , fights and arguments happening around me in the village. It was a great opportunity to observe human beings and their pettiness , selfishness and behaviours. 
I could sit in many such conversations happening in the house and outside amoungst elders, because I kept quiet and didn't talk or intrude in their talks. 
But I learnt a lot a lot from my uncle by following him everywhere, looking at his meticulous habits and his hard work. I also learnt hardwork from my grandmother. 

More in the next .
Greetings
Dks
06/04/25, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy Sri Rama Navami. 
Let us recall his good qualities and try to help in creating a peaceful country and world. Let us live with harmony and peace. 
Greetings 
Dks
07/04/25, 5:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 676
The most important aspect during childhood is the parallel recognition and understanding and development of appropriate habits. It is a high speed learning of many activities at the same time. During the first ten years of life  , one gets a reasonable level of understanding life and dos and don'ts for success in life .  We learn a lot during this period. Some learnings are 
1. regularity first. followed by several habits like 
 2. Cleanliness, respect to elders, piety , prayer, yoga , visit to temples, proper eating habits, exercises, play , discipline followed by 3. Concentration through yoga, questioning, reasoning,  analysing, other mental development , language , reading , writing , arithmetic , culture , games etc followed by 
4. freedom, independence , responsibility , understanding  human behaviours, followed by 5. Problem solving skills, Building trust , searching for truth , balancing aspects of material vs intellectual vs spiritual life , getting a holistic view of life , living and intellectualism etc leading to a mature state in life . Step 5 continues through our entire life. It keeps our mind sharp. It makes our consciousness increase and improve. 
Only a part of 3 above is handled by our school education. Others are given by elders , friends or by self learning and understanding.  This shows the importance of ambience and development of intellectualism that help a person to solve many small and big problems encountered in life. This gives us an important lesson-
Self help is the best help. Analyse every activity before performing it. 

The next step in learning was understanding discipline. I understood that discipline is not blind obedience to authority. Both my grandmother and my uncle never told me to obey what they say , they knew me well. But my parents wanted obedience. Fortunately I wasn't brought up based  on  my parents' way of thinking. 
I understood that discipline means order - rig veda emphasizes that  rthm - order- is essential for a person and society. Order implies organization. Every item has a place to store. Every activity has a correct sequence of steps. The world has both randomness and orderliness. For example , the water cycle - evaporation,  rainfall, rivers , sea cycle - runs our life. There are many things like floods, earthquakes , tsunamis , landslides ,etc that happen occasionally   and  they  are beyond our control . There is an order in a family, in  a street, village , in a city, in a country, in a school, in a temple, in offices,and in every place. Order is ensured through following a set of rules or guidelines, a transparent mechanism,  an organised structure , governance, planning , control and well defined procedures. 
Discipline is a method of building boundaries in running an organization or household, starting with dos and don'ts,  proper etiquette, proper behaviour , good understanding and we'll defined actions . 
Most organizations have a problem with control. Many wanted strong control and approval at the highest level. So every request, serious or trivial, goes up to the top level . This leads to delays , arbitrary decisions and unhappiness. So the current trend in organization is towards empowerment, not control.  I got empowerment at a young age of 7 years itself. 

I would say that  discipline is not obedience and strict control ,but independence and resilience within a well defined and well understood structure, activities, and decision management. Our life depends on that. Our jobs require this discipline, not slavery .  I learnt these aspects of discipline early in my life. 
Independence was a necessity. Let me discuss independence and  organization In the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
08/04/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 677

We all learn a lot of aspects intuitively .  For instance, we learn about organization from childhood. But we don't understand that what we are seeing is organization. We get a hazy idea.
Organizing is an old habit. Hunters Joined together for more strength and safety. So forming groups was the first Organizing activity by humans. Later there groups became a society or village. The group should have order and synergy as well as work distribution for effective living. The organization grew towards functions in groups. 
Science also uses this concept to group materials, elements etc. When an organization becomes bigger, we build a structure . Family is an organization a child sees first. 
The other aspect of a good architecture is searching. A house wife searches for vessels or spices or rice or vegetables to cook.  So she organises storage. Both men and women organize their clothes and books. So grouping of items , a fixed storage place for each group came in next. A child helps in locating items in the house. This sharpens the memory. 
Search was a fundamental activity not only for humans but for computers also. So we divide the storage area to get the requisite data or file. 
We organize many functions like birthdays, marriages or we celebrate festivals in houses or temples. All these have many requirements and activities. 
organizing is a key activity in life.
Organization happens when people work together to accomplish some desired end state or goal. It can happen through intentionally designed activity, spontaneous improvisation, or some combination of the two, but it always depends upon coordinated effort.
Life pressures us to compete, whether that competition is over food or job or education etc. 
Every group or business or law organizes into functional units . So we see organization is built on a formal or informal structure. 
Normally children get some idea of an organization informally. 
But I was lucky to learn about activities , functions, preparations , by observing, helping and participating in many activities in the village organised by my uncle. So I got formal learning and understanding on many aspects of organization. 
I learnt about countries and the world , world wars and independence when I was seven years old. I saw the first public function of independence day in 1948. I saw several festivals . At the age of 10 , I saw the first election, a big organised activity. Most children have experienced many such events and seen organizations. 
But the biggest organization was conducting a marriage. It was planned for a year  .  Lots of activities were involved. I saw a number of marriages during this period . One needed  many months to prepare - major activity is purchases of dresses- readymades were unknown then ,  clothes were purchased and given to a tailor for stiching-, vessels, grocery - sugar was the most difficult commodity then , we needed  licences to buy several kgs of sugar, i went to the taluk office to get a permit for a large quantity of sugar for a marriage- . Then one works on many other aspects like cleaning the house,  putting up a pandal, getting musicians,  cooking snacks etc before a marriage. We need to make jewels . Then we needed  to arrange for milk, flowers, coconuts,   a hall, cooks etc. So it is a sequence of activities. The most difficult task for some is arranging finance based on estimates of expenses. Some borrowed money at a high interest rate, some sold lands . It was tough in those days. So if you are part of a marriage, you learnt about organization. Actually the first step is planning. As soon as a date for a marriage is fixed , we started preparing a list - list of items to buy , list of services required, list of people to be invited , lists of sources for purchase ,list of people to help , search for halls , supervision of activities ,etc. A note book was opened and used to contain most information regarding activities , materials, etc. While sitting with my father for my aunt's marriage , I wrote many things in a notebook.  It opened my eyes to the complexities of organizing a function . 
With marriage activities outsourced today, children now don't have an opportunity to detail activities in a marriage and understand the organization. It is simple for them. So teach them organization formally.
More on my experiences in the next.
Greetings
Dks
09/04/25, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 678

Let me look at another major activity- agricultural cultivation
There are a number of activities starting from enriching the field, preparing seeds, to plowing, planting, irrigation to harvesting and transport. It is a cooperative work .
From the age of seven onwards, i used to go to the field and observed the activities.  We cultivated paddy, pulses, banana and chillies. 
I regularly visited our field to  cut banana leaves for use in the house.
The major activity is harvesting. First a suitable date will be fixed. Then we should get many people to harvest . They will start early at 5am to harvest and after cutting the paddy , they will bring the harvested paddy to an open field for thrashing and winnowing. After paddy is segregated,  it will be measured  and transported to the house by a bullock cart. All these activities should be coordinated and completed by the evening. We have many huge pots to store the grains in the first floor. So the entire harvesting operations needed to be planned in advance. 
Now we need  to sell most of the paddy keeping what is required for our house consumption. We got market rates and sold the paddy within a short time. So it was a hectic time. As it was summer vacation for me ,I would  be present during the entire process lasting several days. It was a great learning - i learnt cultivation Processes, harvesting methods, measurements - in those days paddy was measured by volume not weight -,  market rates , our income etc. I understood how we lived. 
The major learning from organization happened when I observed my uncle in his activities in the village. I was always with him and learnt a lot from him. He was consulted by most people in the village for legal matters. He used to draft legal documents , sale deeds, promissory notes and petitions to the government on many village issues. I observed these activities with a lot of interest and curiosity. I learnt a lot about legal transactions . He will go to the taluk headquarters to the sub registrar's office to register loan documents or sale deeds. I accompanied him on several occasions. I also observed him when he used to negotiate with parties to help them. His just approach and fairness impressed me. 
He conducted the ten day program of Sri Rama Navami celebrations every year. I was with him , understood what he was doing and assisted him. I did this for more than 15 years. This is where I learnt many things. 
The first thing was planning. Supply chain was poor . We need to buy flowers , milk, coconuts, groceries etc. So we had to identify suppliers and give them an advance order. Similarly we arranged for cooks, musicians, speakers etc. We printed invitations and posted them. He built a team of people to help him. They redpected him. 
The most important aspect I learnt was the maintenance of accounts meticulously. I learnt the concept of a ledger from him , started posting in a ledger. His integrity was impeccable. I decided to follow him. I saw how he handled unforeseen circumstances - there were many - and how he solved them without worries. I participated in every activity and learnt a lot about organization from him. It was more than a formal training . The Rama Navami started by him is continuing even now. 
All these gave me independence and confidence to handle major problems. 
Another aspect I   learnt at the age of eight was house construction. Cement was not available in the late 1940s. So we used lime for plastering. lime was available as limestone. We used to put it in water , add sand and ground them using a bullock run grinder . We used that lime for plastering. After plastering, we used shell lime for whitewashing the walls. There will be repairs every year. I used to stay with the masons. Carpenters would make beams. We used mangalore tiles for a part of the roof. I learnt quite a lot about building materials. 
These were my summer camps. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
10/04/25, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 679
These direct involvements provided me with a deep knowledge , understanding and appreciation of the intricacies of organizing activities with limited innovations , limited finances, limited and unreliable supply chain and even some non cooperation issues. I learnt skills needed for real life problem solving. I realized that learning takes place everywhere. I was lucky to be allowed to participate In these activities in a small way. That was the mentoring by my uncle. Many children were treated differently , told to go and play and not talk to elders. But i stayed and listened to all the discussions. That was because I kept quiet and didn't participate in the discussions. So i was allowed to be there. 
I learnt that organization needed mental thinking , soft skills and it is necessary to build a good systematic, pragmatic process. We iterated and improved the process every year. 

 I was observing many tough negotiations happening in the village - the toughest one's were property distributions amongst sons. 
When my grandfather died , there were discussions for four to five days on arriving at a settlement of his property - a house and some agriculture land-  amongst the four brothers - my father and his three younger brothers. I sat with them all the time and saw the pain of the brothers . It wasn't easy. Since the properties were a few, their costs were estimated . They will discuss the details with my uncle in the evening everyday. I was present there also.  My father took the house and half the land and he paid for  the share of others in cash to them. 
All had financial problems . So I  understood the pain of my father and uncles, particularly the youngest one. He used to be carefree and jovial . He had just completed his schooling and needed to go forward in life at that time- a terrible situation. His future looked bleak. I felt sorry for him. He managed well in life , moved to Kolkata with a job in the British high commission. 
 In addition,  they had a major responsibility - getting their youngest sister married , not easy. That was a more difficult job with multiple opinions expressed by the brothers. Finally , after a lot of discussions, they left the job to my father. He took responsibility to conduct the marriage. Fortunately,  it was held in a year's time in the house in the village. I realised the pains of life. 
So my conclusion  is that life teaches many lessons through many people on many occasions and situations. Life lessons, if properly learnt, will make us good , adaptive , collaborative and socially sensitive humans. Social Sensitivity and empathy are essential qualities to be developed by us and I was fortunate to have learnt both qualities and to appreciate them in others. 
Well, let me return to my trust building work. One thing common with most children is that they want to become appreciated. So they learn to do things that please their elders. I followed this behaviour. I never questioned anyone, answered politely . I was trying to create a trust in others on me. I thought that I should make others trust me before I learn to trust them. 
So I put on the best behavior with most village elders , school teachers and helped them on several occasions. Due to my ambience in the house , there were mature expectations from me. Never once I was told to go and play. If I wanted to play, I went but if I wanted to stay , I stay. Even at that young age, I got the respect of many . Some even didn't like me for being meek. I was meek and timid , not adventurous physically . But mentally I was strong. 
One greatest learning I had was religious learning. I understood some Vedic hymns and many upanishadic statements. I listened to Taittriya upanishad a lot. So both my social and religious developments started at that time and continued throughout my life in different forms and manifestations. That was in addition to my intellectual and academic life. 
Greetings 
Dks
11/04/25, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 680
There is a crisp comment from N Ramanathan, my cousin
“Old world charms make it an interesting read.”

There is another  comment and a query from AL Bharat, my nephew
“Beautiful messages Chithappa.
You almost make me imagine your childhood and how interesting it would have been.
So much learning happened along the way, largely because of your inquisitive nature and fortunately you were closely associated with your Uncle.
I too think the joint family system helps in a big way.”
“Is the the Uncle who was at Chinmaya nagar at Vadapazhani?”

My response 
Sorry. I should have clarified . It is my elder uncle, my mother's  elder brother. The other uncle you refer  to is my mother's younger uncle. He was studying and working and used to visit us in the village during summer vacation. 
I stayed with my grandmother, grandfather passed away. So we were alone. My uncle was working in Tirunelveli and he will visit the village on most weekends and stay here in the summer. He was actively involved in many activities in the village. I used to be with him, follow him everywhere , observe him and listened to him. I tried to please him and my grandmother. My younger uncle used to tell me stories. He introduced me to the Merchant of Venice at the age of 8 years. It was the first big story I heard from him. I still remember it. I was upset when Shylock insisted on his pound of flesh and was thrilled with Portia’s condition to Shylock - no blood to be spilled. I liked the finish line. I also heard Othello from him . He has told me many stories. I used to be free with him , though I kept my distance from my elders. 

1952 was the first turning point in my life. I call it a turning point and not a change. The reasons are :
My uncle who was a Hindi teacher in Tirunelveli made a momentous decision that changed my life's directions. The usual village boy's plan was to study upto eighth standard, attend typing and shorthand classes, and migrate to a big city for a job as a typist. Some people went to the high school in the nearby town of  Nanguneri and studied upto 10th. My family was different , two uncles got college degrees and MSc later. So my moving to Tirunelveli for continuous high school studies without disruption was a great boon. That opened up opportunities for higher education for me. Since my paternal grandfather died when I was in 4th or 5th standard,  my father moved to Madras without a solid permanent job. So I wasn't expecting support from him for my academic growth. So I feel this decision was a great turning point in my life, I almost consider it a liberation. I got clarity about my life's directions. I almost decided at that young age of 10 years on my goal - to become an engineer. So i consider this as a major turning point in my life - definitely it was the first turning point based on a conscious decision with great foresight by my uncle. 
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
12/04/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 681
N Ramanathan pointed out an error in my post 680
“A typo error, mother's younger brother, not uncle. Just to establish that I read your posts closely!”
My response 
Agreed . Thanks for pointing out an error and correcting it. I am humbled your keen interest in my posts. Thanks
Dr TKM Babu has a comment:
“Great DKS
I have come to know of your young days.
I know you from 1959 from TCE.
Thanks for writing your experience at a young age.
Mahendra Babu.”

My response
Thanks. I am discussing stages of my learnings from childhood. 


My learnings went up several levels. My sources, areas and dimensions of learning increased. 
Let me look at the aspects in sequence.  
First I want to discuss the changes in my social interactions . 
I moved into a city from a village - so my lifestyle changed. The city was the district headquarters with many facilities. 
Socially , my village life was highly interlinked with others. I knew most people in my street and neighbourhood in my village and knew the happenings in the village and in most houses. Social and religious interactions were close. 
But that changed in the city - a big contrast. There were very little social interactions. I knew my classmates in the street and used to play with them. We played cricket at a nearby ground. A few teachers lived on my street . So I knew them.  I knew a few people living near our house - two bankers, one of them a kannadiga. Otherwise our interactions with neighbours were minimal. Most people from our  village came to the city regularly for some work and visited us. Many who  were living in big cities like Madras and Bombay etc came to our home while visiting the village every year. Most migrated persons from the village will visit the village at least once a year to see their parents. In those days , village life was active with many general festivals like deepavali, Sankranti,  navarathri etc , temple festivals, sriramanavami and sankara jayanthi celebrations  and many functions like marriages etc in many houses. The elderly lived in the village and their sons went to cities for jobs. Both sons and a few married daughters visited the village regularly. Some like my cousins D R Lakshman, D R Sundaram , D R Krishnan were visiting the village  to perform  puja to their house deities every year. Most stopped in Tirunelveli and visited my uncle . So I had better interactions with them.  
Next change was food. I was introduced to many vegetables like potato, cabbage etc. But our food was still the same simple food . The only change was the snacks like vada , bajji etc prepared occasionally by my aunt. The only luxury was that we got mountain bananas from sirumalai . That banana was small and tasty compared to the big payen variety cultivated in the village.  We lived frugally. Though more commodities were available,  there was a scarcity for sugar and most manufactured items. There were many grocery shops and hotels. I was eating in the hotels. This meant that i moved from the production based environment in my village to a market based environment and a convenience oriented society in a city. We didn't store many items in the city. We could buy any grocery item  as and when we wanted . 
My father used to visit us . While he was on a month-long visit ,  he stayed in another nearby  house .So I used to get him morning coffee from the hotel everyday. 
My visits to my  village were restricted to school vacations and festival times. I was more involved with both srirama Navami and sankara jayanthi celebrations in the village. I got a deep understanding of accounting, organization, operational management , supply chain handling with uncertainties, communications. My learnings and beliefs on integrity, correctness, transparency , commitment and dedication improved considerably. These qualities got etched in my mind. 
Since I was the only one in my age group from the village studying in a nearby city high school, I was treated differently by my erstwhile classmates and other friends. I liked that special  treatment a lot. But that also produced some jealousy and I realised it . 
More in the next.
Greetings
13/04/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 682
I felt social interactions are important . Today social deprivation in children due to TV and mobile phones is considered a major worry by psychologists. I learnt a lot from many adults during my school days by observing them and discussing with them. I learnt my geography of India- life in big cities like Bombay,  madras, Calcutta,  Delhi , Hyderabad from elders in the village living there. I learnt etiquette , opportunities , industrialisation , from them. Social interactions are  a great source for learning. We need to bring our children back into social circles. With technologies like video call they can talk to friends and relatives regularly. 
Social interactions help in many ways. First, it teaches us good behaviour, second it teaches us good communications and listening skills, and third it establishes trust with others when you find what others say is credible and trustworthy. My trust in many people including teachers  got built through this process of interactions. Interactions provide one means to assess the trust level of a person. If he bluffs, you won't trust him.
My next big change in learning is something I consider a big boon - voracious reading . I used to read a book every week - mostly Tamil fiction , biography . 
Most books depicted the social life in those days. They mostly reflected family life - a boy meeting a girl and marrying her story. All authors found great solutions to all problems. All's well that ends well. While you find a lot of tragic events in the novel, the end will be good .  But biographies impressed me a lot. That happened in my early years after listening to sankara vijayam of swami vidyaranya for several years. I found several biographies but what impressed me was U V Swaminatha iyer's  autobiography. It was simple , easy to read. Another biography was that of Yogacharya Sundaram . It introduced me to bangalore. There were books on yoga and also a lot of religious books.
 Similarly I read the weekly magazines also. This built a habit of reading everyday , assimilating the materials and this habit continues even now. Reading is not important , remembering the gist is more important. This wasn't easy. Out of the thousands of books I read , I can't recall the gist of most books. But some aspects of quite a few books  standout. 
My other source of learning about living , society and country, its famous people came from magazine stories - particularly Kalkis writings excited me. I understood pre independent India from Alaiosai. It was a classic masterpiece of informative and simple writing. I used to visit public libraries regularly to read books. I used to borrow a lot of books from the college libraries. This practice continued in Bangalore also. 
I got my first major lesson :
Every problem and every situation has many views. So binary solutions - true or false - leads to one view only. But many views are near true even though they are different. So there are many solutions ,many understandings possible for every view. The views look at a situation without constraints.
This contracts the rational scientific concepts taught in schools. Science provides constrained answers.
The second lesson 
Most views of people emanate from their range, their perception, their understanding , their experiences and their thinking. So you can't discard the processes.
The third lesson 
Keep an open receptive mind. Don't reject others' views  quickly. A useful tool is a clear mind and a constantly contemplating mind . Think, contemplate , judge the views , find the contradictions,  if any. 
My practice of meditation at an early age made me think and contemplate Whenever I was free and sitting alone undisturbed. This was another boon for me. Ideas flash occasionally. Mind is not blank. 
It is not necessary to have a problem to think about and contemplate , one can and should do it in vacuum also. 
Greetings 
Dks
14/04/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 683
Let me look at another aspect - technology awareness. 
I became aware of technology and its impacts . I found that electricity   extended our night time activities by about three hours. But most people used electricity for lighting only then . We saw electric fans being  used only by 1956 or so. Refrigerators were unknown . Even textile mills were run with steam turbines and long shafts with pulleys and ropes. Electrification was very slow. Most towns and villages didn't have electricity . 
Radio gave us news and music, particularly carnatic music by famous musicians . There were many cinema houses for entertainment. But I got disenchanted with movies after watching a few. The only  films  I remember now  are Sampoorna ramayan, Mayabazar, Insaniyat and jhanak jhanak  Payal bhaje. I was already familiar and used the two transport systems - buses and trains. 
I learnt many new languages like English, Sanskrit and Hindi. This was very useful. I got good aptitude and foundations for many languages. I hated no language. I even learnt a few Telugu and kannada words from our neighbours. My father knew quite a bit of Telugu having lived in madras for several years. I started reading a lot of classic  literature writings in these languages. I had good familiarity with Tirukural,  Raghuvamsam, meghadutam,  and many other books.

The people were changing. I was seeing many changes. Independence idealism was slowly dying. Greed was showing its head.  People’s aspirations increased.  Many wanted political power. The first general  elections were held then. I saw the campaigning .So I became aware of politics . True , congress won. In that election , no symbols were allotted to candidates, but colored boxes. Symbols were introduced in the next election. Congress didn't get a majority in Madras assembly . So Rajaji was brought in as chief minister to stabilise the state politics. His rule had many positives , and saw a great reorganization. The state of Andhra was carved out in 1953 and Rajaji fought to retain Madras as Tamilnadu capital despite demands by Andhra.(Andhra pradesh came in 1956 after the merger of Hyderabad .  State reorganization unified all states under a single category. ). Rajaji also had a tough time controlling the violence of DK and DMK against Hindi first. The anti Hindi agitation fizzled out until 1965. Similarly the two parties unleashed a violence against brahmins in south india - we were affected by it. He gave instructions to police to put the violence down. That helped a lot. He also made congress strong, reduced the influence of communists and almost destroyed the justice party. There was no opposition then. But kamaraj schemed to throw him out. Rajaji’s relations with Nehru were not good. So within a short period , he was removed in 1954 and Kamaraj became the chief minister.  
But from  1953 onwards, politics became the hotbed of hatred . DMK started anti Hindi, anti brahmin movements. They introduced the Aryan dravidian divide . They justified violence.  They started anti religious propaganda by decrying Tamil literature with agitations against kamba ramayanam and most other literature. But they introduced a different oratorical skill in Tamil. 
Communists were strong then and started agrarian agitations for agricultural reforms - land for the tiller. Many poor and old people lost their lands and livelihood support. 
So i got my good understanding of our political situation.

 I used to  visit the local library regularly and read more books. 
 
I found the local library very useful , and used them in many cities till I came to bangalore. 

Greetings
Dks
15/04/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 684

Let me get back to my trust building activity. I had a few classmates as friends in the village. But I knew all the others in my street, talked to teenagers, adults and seniors. So I had a good relationship. Also topics were limited about school, people , about work, etc . Most times topics were on festivals, temple activities . Conversations were simple. 
But when I came to the city , the situation changed. 
Still I became friendly to my classmates , but I didn't know  students in other sections - there were four sections in each class- and other classes. I talked with my classmates everyday before the start of the class.  We even discussed life in big cities, and in other countries. We knew about England, Japan, Singapore, Penang, Ceylon,  USA, France and many other countries. When elections were going on, we discussed about speeches by local leaders. Caste was not discussed there. Similarly ,most were reluctant to talk about food due to strong likes and dislikes. 
We participated in many programs. One of my classmates was in Nawab Rajamanikkampillai's  drama troupe. So he acted in most school plays. We used to have cultural programs . I participated in debates and elocution contests . But i got the first or second prize for academic performance every year till 11th standard - all six years. So I collected a lot of books as prizes. I got an English dictionary and a wren and Martin grammar book and several other books. This also meant that many other students knew me. 
Since there were about five of my classmates in my street , I became friendly with them . While we used to play in the evening, there weren't many common topic. We talked about school, teachers and exams. Some were cinema addicts. So they will talk about movies they saw recently , about actors, scenes in the films etc . I didn't contribute to that conversation. Interest in cricket was picking up. There was a ground in the neighbouring street and another five classmates were living there. So we started playing there. We had a wooden piece for the bat and a tennis ball, but no wickets initially. Later we got some sticks for wickets. We used to play every weekend there. I tried to learn how to cycle there, fell down a few times and stopped that activity. I regretted the fact that I can't cycle. 
So that was my conscious effort to build friendships and trust- acceptance in a group is trust. Playing together is another trust. 
As regards seniors and elders, I talked to a few people in my street and my teachers- that is all restricted conversation. As I said before, I used to listen in on the conversations my uncle had with other teachers in the school - one was a regular visitor to our house everyday- and our visitors. I learnt a lot from that. 
Then I got another opportunity. About 12 senior students from high schools and the college used to come to our house to learn Hindi in the evening.  There were two batches. So I also joined these two batches and became busy learning Hindi and appearing for exams conducted by the Hindi prachar Sabharwal. My interactions with these senior and college students broadened my thinking , and opened up new topics. Hindi books revealed facts about life in the north. So my school life was hectic and I built a good trust network. I was in touch with one student in that group -R Rama lingam - who did IPS and joined karnataka police. I was in touch with him till his retirement.  
More in the next. 
Greetings
Dks
16/04/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 685
Let me collate my learnings during this period of schooling. 
I learnt religious literature in a good measure - upanishads, ramayana, mahabharata,  some aspects of vedas, Sankaracharya's writings, purely outside the school amidst a lot of ridicule. I admired the literature for its variety - thousands of books, -,  vastness of topics covered- prayer, yagas,  life styles, language, speech, grammar,  yoga and meditation, astronomy, geography, number theory, logic, construction, animal lifes, philosophy, explanations , siddhantas, agamas, tantras, etc-, depth of coverage  - going into unknowns , and unknowables, studying human systems in detail, health aspects, study of mind, astronomy, infinity , completeness , eternal etc- , stages of explanations, structures etc. Rational arguments don't stand today before big data and ML. Similarly rationalism is a limited view compared to the highly holistic and enlarged Views of our religious literature which is several thousand years to a few decades old. That establishes openness- we can criticize, freedom - not dogmatic- , and continuous interpretations ,  upgradations  and clarifications. I learnt about the ideas of Raja Ram Mohan Roy's Brahmosamaj,  Dayanand Saraswati's Arya Samaj, Swami sivananda , Ramana , Aurobindo Ghose, and many others - all these through reading books , magazines , critiques and discussions with many . 
I learnt a lot about our social life from the literature of hundreds of books and magazines  I read during this period. I also learnt more about history , geography . Most importantly I learnt about hundreds of people who got us freedom and who built India. Some names are - Gandhi, Rajaji, Nehru, Sardar Patel, Kumaran, subramania Bharati, VO Chidambaram Pillai, Vanchi, Tilak, Ranade, Gokhale, Bose, CV Raman, Rabindranath Tagore, UV Swaminatha iyer,  Sir M Visvesvaraya , JN Tata, Birla, Dalmia,  TVS, Sympsons Anantharamakrishnan, Easwaran, AL Mudaliar etc. I admired many of my teachers.
My learnings in the school were limited to Tamil, Sanskrit , English and mathematics.  My learnings on science was poor. Actually , I got a better meaning of science only after I joined the engineering degree program in 1959 in Madurai. I should specially remember Mr  R Ramaswamy who kindled our interest in atomic Physics , radio receivers in addition to basic knowledge. His knowledge level of modern topics was reasonable, not in depth. Similarly I got a huge foundation in mathematics built by Mr KK Menon , who learnt new topics like matrices and gave us a foundation in calculus. His energy and interest in learning were great. 
Greetings 
Dks
17/04/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 686

I am changing direction to look at another aspect of academics. It is a disease that afflicts many - academic freedom. Currently it is a  big issue  in the US. I have no opinion on what is going on in US . But i thought that a balancing is needed here. Many academics wanted to fight Modi in indian universities and institutions in the name of academic freedom. Again I am not taking sides in this aspect. I thought about it and N Ramanathan posed a query.
“Harvard may be a top Management Institute, but can it manage Trump?”
So i decided to look at this aspect. 
Let me define academic freedom as freedom to do academic work as per existing practices without political and administrative controls and influences but based on collective peer group decisions. That is a general enough definition. 
Why do we need it?
Academics want it to do independent unconstrained research work to invent new things and to take knowledge forward . That is how research works. So  It is a must. There are other types of research like sponsored research , output oriented research etc that have defined objectives so the researchers should follow them. So freedom is constrained here. 
While academics were free to do what they wanted, now due to funding conditions and sponsorship , their goals are defined and their progress checked by a third party. Free grants are reducing. So there is some kind of limits on research. But still academics have freedom to do the following :
1.To define research directions, research policies, and progress of research work 
2.To define a code of conduct for academics to follow
3.To frame rules to organize and run academic programs and activities - this is done by an academic senate.
4 To define and build a  curriculum , to teach courses and to evaluate as per defined set of rules.
5. To go by peer discussions and peer reviews
And 
6. To work for the furtherance of knowledge for the benefit of all. Knowledge for the sake of knowledge.  
Let me start with my first question :
Is freedom absolute ? This is particularly with reference to social sciences , speeches etc. An academic is bound by responsible behaviours , should not be biased , and should obey the code of conduct.  If an academic claims absolute freedom , it will destroy world order, and it can destroy the  peace for an individual. It is difficult to prove defamation in India because of intellectual freedom. That is where trouble begins. Freedom is not a licence to abuse some one or some system. But it is difficult to decide for some - it is judgmental and subjective- that something is a protest or abuse. Unfortunately freedom or absolute freedom hasn't been understood. 
That leads me to academic freedom. 
What is academic freedom ?
It is the freedom for a faculty or student 
To work on a topic or area of their choice by devising procedures for solving the problems and - importantly- defending their results to peers in the area. The divisions and specialisations have increased and it is difficult to look at thousands of publications. Peer review is constrained. Recently we are seeing some faculty withdrawing or retracting their publications. This may lead to AI reviewing research work. That is a danger academics are not concerned about. There are tools to detect plagiarism now. Normally,  even this freedom is questioned in some places - boundaries are fixed on the areas and relevance. 
To conduct their activities - research and teaching - according to the accepted norms. Here is where conflicts come. Each one interprets norms differently. Institutions review the work output not the methodology . How do you ensure integrity here. Most academics are honest. Here principally freedom meant that you use standard procedures and when you deviate , then you need to convince your peers that your methodology is correct and appropriate. But there is no mechanism unless the modified procedure goes for publications .  What freedom means is that you are mature. You decide your topics, your hypothesis and methods of proving . That can't be questioned by administration or other unconnected people ,but can be questioned by peers. 
Is there another aspect to academic freedom?
Yes , it is collective to decide on academic procedures, curriculum, evaluations, future directions etc. It is not individual freedom.
But the important question is:
Does it extend to political activities ?
 One can have his views on politics and that is democratic freedom. But can one insist on forcing it inside an institution on others through protests . Does he not infringe on the freedom to conduct academic activities by disturbing it.  In India protests are held outside ,not inside a campus. So that is an accepted norm. But can you invite a politician into IISc to discuss political aspects ? That is a question with no clear understanding.
What all these boil down is that there is nothing absolute here but a judgmental process . Judgmental processes are subjective. Opinions differ. 
That is what is happening with Harvard - their Hinduphobic views are hurting a large number of people  and are not scientific . What are the academics in it? While wokism and leftist philosophies are encouraged , opposite views are suppressed . Brainwashing is allowed. Is this academic freedom?
We had a similar situation in JNU- you needed to be a leftist. Rightist views are not allowed. That destroyed academics in science and engineering. 
To me the first requirement for academics who want to preserve academic freedom is an unbiased open and critical mind and thinking. Also in my view academic freedom doesn't exist in most Indian universities and institutions. Politics dominates everywhere. Earlier it was left centred and now right centred.
I know there are opposite views. Welcome comments. 
Greetings 
Dks
17/04/25, 5:18 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Hello Sir, It is interesting you brought this point of academic freedom immediately after your memories of learning Indian scriptures at a very young age. In our culture, we had public debates. Do you think this type of mechanism of challenging publicly with the objective of finding the truth together (samvaada) will bring in more academic freedom?
18/04/25, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 687
I got two views - an academics thinking and a practising MDs approach. 
Prof Vyasulu responded to my comments.
“DKS, are you limiting the discussion to academic freedom? Or are we talking of the wider freedom of expression? As an English judge once said, my freedom to swing my arms ends when they hit your nose.  In democratic societies, one can generally say what they like, however unpleasant that may be to someone else. That other person can respond...but not violently. Violence is to be avoided. Here morality comes in. Our traditions let us choose our beliefs. One cannot/must not force one's belief on another. But this doesn't mean you can't have a discussion.
Recently I read in the papers that IISc did not permit...I think it was Aruna Roy...to speak after being invited. To me this is over reach. This is a contentious subject but the topic remains incomplete if we cannot respect the views...which we need not agree with...of others. That is so in academics as well as the larger society.”

My response
Thanks. 
I discussed only academic independence.  I didn't get into the larger question of freedom of expression. The Supreme Court is supporting it very well. So that will be respected.  So we have no problem there. Please recall that we did most of our protests - like the Bedthi agitation, Narmada project, kaiga project, etc- outside , not on the campus . Campus is immersed in academics. Even the talk on narmada agitation by Medha Padkar  in the institute or the seminar on kaiga didn't create any ripple inside. People are unreasonable and highly egocentric .  

N Ramanathan responded to the query.
“Glad that my one liner was part - instrumental in triggering a detailed analysis of the core of educational institutions. I agree freedom is never absolute or unconditional. It is invariably circumscribed by the code of conduct ( written and unwritten), institutional norms, internal rules and regulations. Politics has its place and relevance but not everywhere. No businesses enterprise will tolerate political activity within its premise despite every employee having some political affiliation or preference. It shall be all the more so in educational institutions where the prime or sole focus is knowledge building besides personality development but not its political side. Students or professors can pursue their political choice and fight for it but outside the complex. I would anyday support totally curbing political activities inside an educational complex that can never be allowed a platform for any purpose other than their core focus.”
Thanks for your comments . I agree with you. But my concern was that the west was the guardian of academic independence. India didn't have any worthwhile independence in the universities and the situation is going bad in the US. There are no defenders of academic freedom. It doesn't sound good. So what will happen to the academic truth?
Greetings
Dks
19/04/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 688


Dr TKM Babu has a question:
“👍🙏
May I ask a question?
How did you get inspiration to study literature on Sanatana Dharma?( Vedas, upanishads, Puranas,apart from tow big epics R and M )
Thanks
Mahendra Babu”

My response
Several people asked me this question. It is not taught in school. 
I used to quote upanishads , Sankaracharya,  Swami Vivekananda , Bhartrhari in several talks in my public lectures at different places. I had this practice for more than 50 years. So many people asked me after my talk ,” where did you pick up so much interest and knowledge on such difficult subjects ?”
Let me first explain my interest - how it came about?
Three reasons
Ambience and freedom
Village atmosphere - spiritual and religious
Great Mentorship

Firstly it was the ambience in my house - I was hearing Ramayana from age 3 onwards - several times a year sometimes ,but definitely once a year. My uncle will recite a few slokas from Ramayana everyday. I heard it daily  and so I understood Ramayana well. Ramayana was popular then. 
Secondly, prayers are mandatory . I saw and heard it everywhere. So it stays in you. 
Thirdly, I lived in a village with a simple life with lots of religious activities . So I heard Vedic recitals and it was common to listen to Taittiriya upanishad regularly. That impressed me deeply. I was ,I don't know the reason , a very restless person , always thinking. Fortunately , not worrying , but thinking about people, their behaviours, belief systems , and about nature etc. My curiosity was not curtailed but encouraged. I was lucky to have a great scholar ,my uncle, as my mentor. I wasn't interested in reciting vedic hymns and slokas. I wanted the meaning. I wanted to know what they imply . My uncle was highly knowledgeable.  He answered my questions. He was well versed in Sanskrit and Hindi as well as religious and spiritual matters and a sthitaprajna. My learnings came from him to a large extent. He moulded  me . 
Fourthly , people in the pre-independence and post-independence period were idealistic, tolerant ,accepted different religious practices and synergy and order prevailed . They never mocked at vedic hymns , but appreciated them.  I mean people of every caste and community. Those qualities disappeared by the 1950s. That is a tragedy.
I had not much interest in rituals , but more interest in analysing what is said in vedas and upanishads and why they said it. This was a constant learning process. 
I heard a lot of stories from many people - panchatantra, hitopadesa,  mahabharata.  The greatest aspect of our early literature is the way many stories are intermingled with a main story. 
My knowledge of mahabharata came from the countless stories I heard during my school days and reading Rajaji’s Vyasar virundhu- very well written in simple language but with a lot of details. I liked several social practices -  Vidura , inter caste marriage, Ekalavya, karna, polyandry, evils of gambling , greed, etc.  I loved those stories. One thing that remained  in my mind from my younger days is the focus of Arjuna when Dronacharya asked his students what they saw in the tree? and got unsatisfactory answers. Arjuna's focused response remained with me. It wasn't a piece in memory. But I applied it in my education. It made me concentrate my mind and focus it on the task - learning in a classroom, reading a book . I applied it everywhere except in the workshop practice at TCE Madurai during my engineering education days.  Four  habits were started by me. First was a steady and calm mind due to meditation. Second  was a sharpened memory power to remember a lot of details . This constant practice paid rich dividends during exam time. Third was deep concentration for hours . Fourth was focus and determination . I didn't give up on tough math problems. I worked on them. Recall , I tried to solve most problems in Parkersmith on electrical engineering  and also in Pratt on hydraulics . That deepened my understanding.  
My second understanding from the question asked by Babu and others is their inner feeling that why are these vedantic teachings not taught in schools. I find that even religious institutions concentrate on rituals and not on vedanta. Vedanta is a big no no in our schools ,I don't know why. Universities don't work on vedantic philosophy. We threw  hinduism into the trash fully. Vedanta will help in our quests for spirituality in addition to materialism. Upanishadic learning is useful in doing research. The principles allow us to go deeper into a topic. 
So When will this-teaching of vedanta-  happen? 
Some institutions teach vedas ,but they concentrate on Chandas ,not the interpretation and meanings and relevance. 
Greetings
Dks
20/04/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 689
Based on yesterday's post ,Mr Uday Singh, a serial entrepreneur,  has these comments:
“DK
I know you for 3 decades now. What factors made you what you are certainly the ones you have mentioned here. But you are modest in not articulating that you imbibed the learning’s into the core of your heart. You have internalised them. That is what makes you the person you are today - a wise man!  Uday”

My response
I like your term “ internalize” . It is a great term. While I agree with your comments, I am unable to describe the process. I was thinking about it and mentioned habits of contemplation and concentration as well as the concepts and practices of self learning, deep learning and keen observations. But I am not sure ,” how does one get the practice of internalisation”. I don't think there is one standard process. One need to learn at an  early  age the following which may lead to better internalization :(this doesn't include values and emotions. One can't get all these characteristics to a good level. Levels may vary with people.)
1.Meditation
2.Keen interest in everything happening around you
3.Open mind
4.Review your beliefs and adaptation 
5.Questioning  and curiosity 
6.Keen observation and listening, 
7.Thinking and contemplation 
8.Concentration, strong focused work culture.
9.Abstraction and comprehension
10.Memorizing and remembering practices
11.Futuristic thinking
12.Unsatisfied mind
13. Application of what you learnt to solve  the problems you encountered and deciding on future actions. 
I consider the last step of using your acquired intelligence to solve the problems coming before you very important. 
I believe one trait of internalization is memorizing facts, thinking and contemplating about them, understanding the facts holistically , analysing them and using them. That is a cognition process. If this is understood by teachers and parents and appropriate processes are built , our learning systems will improve. 
Getting your space, your freedom , your independence to think and your confidence boosts at a young age is essential to allow you to grow intellectually. That is the first hurdle. Most families don't accept the fact that their young child can think , can understand and they  need independence and freedom  . They don't expose their child to real world situations . They keep the child tied to them and tell them what to do at all times. They don't allow a child to experiment, to decide on its own and to make  mistakes and to correct the mistakes. That freedom doesn't exist. A child is considered ignorant - a moron incapable of doing anything - and needs to be supported always. That is the tragedy. You don't allow your children to grow. This is a serious problem. 
It takes a lot of time to build these qualities. I think the most successful people have acquired these qualities to easily move from task to task , discipline to discipline ,  and  company to company . I don't think I have these qualities. My level of these characteristics is very  limited. 
Thanks Uday 
Greetings 
Dks
21/04/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 690

Sanjay  Chitnis has another take on academic freedom - he looks at another angle that was hurting me for several decades. 
“Hello Sir, It is interesting you brought this point of academic freedom immediately after your memories of learning Indian scriptures at a very young age. In our culture, we had public debates. Do you think this type of mechanism of challenging publicly with the objective of finding the truth together (samvaada) will bring in more academic freedom?”

This needs to be looked at from  many views.
Let me pose the concern of Sanjay. How do you prove your  research outputs are correct , consistent and new? How does one challenge the output of a research particularly in today's context of lakhs of publications and insufficient experimentation with many resorting to Matlab simulation?
Scientists evolved methods like observation, explanations, experimentation, analysis etc to prove their theory. Faraday and Volta  showed by demonstration. Newton  proved with experiments and mathematics. Bertrand Russell  did it with logic , mathematics and philosophy. Slowly methods evolved , but it wasn't enough.  So the Royal Society was started for discussions , recognition and approval. It was the first peer review and recognition mechanism. 
So Mechanisms exist. But still this question of proof is not satisfactorily answered by our current system.  Everything depends on the integrity of the individual.  
Let me see the current situation .
First ,we believe that publications provide a proof of correctness of a research work.
But with vast areas of research with faster changes happening, we don't have a vast and proven referee system. That is why retractions are happening. I am glad that there are people in many institutions who read, think and ask questions courageously. But these papers are only a  very small fraction. What about the other thousands being published? Who guarantees their authenticity? 
Another major approach for proof was through  the conferences. I have attended a few hundred conferences - from hyped ones of IEEE,  IFAC, IFIP,ACM ,VLSI
to institutional research conferences held at IISc, IITs,  and many foreign universities 
to professional conferences run by the institution of engineers, CSI,IETE, etc 
to specialised conferences organized by CBIP,COMAD,CISMOD,   Coal India, Department of Electronics 
to conferences organised by colleges.
 My experience is unhappiness - literally no discussions , most of the audience were disinterested , they wanted to present their paper and go sightseeing etc. So I didn't find conferences as fact finding missions. 
There is a third approach- PhD thesis evaluation and viva. At least at IISc,  this is a serious exercise with strong peer reviews. But that is not true with most universities today. I had many experiences. Let me narrate a few. 
In my PhD thesis ,i used multivariable Taylor series to prove the order of convergence of a nonlinear equation of thousands of variables. So I had an issue with notation. The not so  well known,  but well established approach of tensors was used by some to represent three or four dimensions particularly by Kron to analyse electrical machines . So I was familiar about tensors as I taught my course at iisc on electrical machines. Actually , this course revealed to me the fact that if you want to understand a concept, try to model it in detail and analyse the model. That was the method used by Leibnitz, the famous mathematician to analyse a fault in an electrical machine. I also realised that you get clarity through this process. I studied electrical machines for three years at my UG time, read several books, did several lab experiments ,but understood nothing. Only when information started using modeling and analysis , i learnt about transients and subtransients. Clarity evolves. 
 So I did my representations in 1968 using the  tensor notation. Dr C Devanathan ,professor in the  maths Department ,helped me . Unfortunately he passed away in 1970 just when I submitted my thesis. At my post viva, there were two external examiners , one who evaluated my thesis - Prof M V Hariharan,IIT, Bombay- and another who didn't- Dr R Sankar.  The second examiner, a mathematics/ numerical methods expert with a PhD from Oxford , questioned my notation. Prof Narayana Iyengar, Chair of the department,  got a book and a journal identified by me from the library and showed them to the examiner . He accepted it half heartedly. But what I show here is the fact that there was a serious attempt to check my thesis. There are scholars who took their job seriously and tried to reason out the methods used.  I was happy. That shows that  we have a rigorous process at iisc. 
I encountered similar situations in the case of reviews of my PhD students . So I realised that the system is working. When I was the dean of engineering,  I saw hundreds of reports of examiners and found a critical evaluation in most cases. So I am happy. But that is not true elsewhere.
In two cases of PhD evaluation , both  at IITs- Madras and Bombay,  the faculty supervisors openly expressed their displeasure that I was posing too many questions to the candidate. They thought post viva was a formality and I was fussy. 
But there were many cases where all corrections that I suggested were accepted by the supervisors and students  .
Many universities were after procedures , not the academic correctness.  I had many funny experiences with PhD thesis evaluations.

There is a fourth case of sponsored research. Normally , these are reviewed periodically. I had been involved in several reviews of DST but if I was too tough, I was removed from the review committee. 
Let me see the system proposed by vedas and upanishads and followed for thousands of years in the country in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
21/04/25, 8:00 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir for taking up this topic. Looking forward to more in tomorrow's post.
21/04/25, 8:01 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Now AI is being used as evaluator of evaluations. Many publications are getting withdrawn
22/04/25, 5:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 691
“Cruelty has a human heart, 
  And Jealousy a human face; 
Terror the human form divine,
   And Secrecy the human dress. 
The human dress is forged iron,   
The human form a fiery forge,
 The human face a furnace sealed,  
 The human heart its hungry gorge.”
 William Blake

We discussed academic responsibility as it exists now. Let me look at the concerns of vedas about discussions. 
Purva mimamsa describes methods of proofs of various theories. It focused on a multidimensional approach to prove a hypothesis. Nyaya was later built to provide a logical basis. The darshanas showed the possibility of multiple approaches to prove a concept through many analytical , logical, reasoning , experiential and evidential methods  
So the suggestion of Sanjay is timely and should be addressed. 
The idea of open discussions is stressed in rig veda itself. Rig veda says that open discussions are good methods for resolving disputes and bring in transparency , understanding and participation in governance and maintenance of order. It talks about sabhas and samitis.
What is a sabha ?
It is a committee of elders . Its main jobs are advising the rulers on various matters. It meets regularly. The veda talks about the proper methods for participation of members , their attention and interest in the topics . 
The samiti consists of all members of the village and it has the powers to elect a king and to remove a king. 
See the concept of participative democracy there. Further , we don't see caste references here - it is inclusive of all people . Sabha also refers to all elders ,not a community. 
Well , over a period of time , practices changed , I think,  leading to powerful kings and dynastic rule as we see in Ramayana and Mahabharata.   The concept of Raja dharma was forgotten. What Kautilya wrote was ignored.
While the sabha concept was retained in a diluted form, samiti disappeared. A tragedy. 
The second aspect was samvad - open challenges , arguments and discussions to establish one's theory. 
For millennia , Indian scholars were defending their scholarship and their methodology at many places . Many hundreds of  cities like Kashi,  Darbhanga, Kanchipuram , Tanjore, Sringeri,  and many other places nurtured scholars and encouraged samvad. 
The first detailed account of a big congregation of 1000 scholars questioning Yajnavalkya in King Janaka's court is to be found in Brihadaranyaka upanishad.  That tells us the purpose of a conference. Time is not an essence here but showing proof of scholarship. 
Dissent is also evident in Yajnavalkya. He rejected his guru's teaching of Yajur veda and developed a new stream of Shukla Yajurveda.  He has to return his learnings from his guru and relearn. So unlearning and relearning was established by him. 
Yajnavalkya also established rules for samvad - clarity, detailing , logic . He introduced the neti concept in samvad . He wanted a holistic definition of a concept and the importance of logic and languages. 
Samvad without fear was displayed in Thiruvilayadal , a Tamil classic, where a poet Nakkirar challenges Lord Shiva on the concept of the smells  in a lady's hair. Kings encouraged Samvad. 
Another example is about Sankaracharya.  He did Samvad in Benares and convinced a large number of scholars. He destroyed the concept of anatman in Buddhism and defeated most buddhists . He established thereby the concept of unity of Brahman and Atman,  known as Advaita .  
But his well known fight was with Mandanamishra which lasted for a week. The judge was Mandan Mishra's wife.  Sankara won  and Mishra became his disciple. 
Ramanuja also had many such philosophical discussions. This approach of samvad was well established and continued for several millenia. That led to the development of many philosophical ideas, thoughts and disciplines. It integrated many disciplines like mathematics, astronomy, logic , languages, human behaviours, ethics, and evolution of the universe. 
While we saw three major schools of Sankara , Ramanuja and Madhwa evolve , and we saw several other schools of advaita evolving in kashmir, Bengal,  karnataka,Andhra  kerala and Tamilnadu , we found some new avenues like bhakti marga and the development of  grammar,metallurgy, astronomy, logic, geometry , etc evolving over centuries producing hundreds of scholars and thousands of treatises. Gurukula and samvad were the major instruments to build new knowledge.  
One of the best examples of this is  Navya nyaya expounded by many scholars in Bengal and Bihar region with a different role from karnataka - both Udupi and Sringeri as well as kerala . They worked for clarity and correctness. Navya nyaya shows how a new discipline of logic evolved first  and gave birth to several logic schools. Sanskrit literature abounds with hundreds of theories and methods of proving them. We lost that culture of questioning. Today, We mistake questioners as a nuisance.  We kill curiosity. 
Thanks Sanjay for your comments. 
He has more comments 
Sanjay Chitnis: Thank you Sir for taking up this topic. Looking forward to more in tomorrow's post.
Sanjay Chitnis: Now AI is being used as evaluator of evaluations. Many publications are getting withdrawn
Greetings 
Dks
23/04/25, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 692
Auguries of Innocence 
To see a World in a Grain of Sand 
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, 
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand 
And Eternity in an hour.
William Blake


Dr TKM Babu expresses his concerns:
“Dr DKS
Some of the olden system of participative democracy and no caste system were core principles for governance. These were misunderstood by many partly by politicians and the like and through  the media they control.  
How can we reverse the trend.?
Thanks
Mahendra Babu”

My response 
I agree with you that we lost many such valued and idealistic solutions and practices over a period of centuries. 
Let me explain some reasons as I understood some that we can find answers. 
Many ideals are difficult to follow. The kings stopped looking at the Raja dharma as they found it difficult to implement. 
Kingdoms became large - from a cluster of villages to a large area. So the samiti concept didn't work. Kings became usurping the powers. 
Peace was disturbed and fights between neighbouring kings became common. This made the kings to define new rules and consequently they became powerful. None in his kingdom can oppose them. A well known example is the nanda dynasty. Chanakya was evicted from his kingdom. The king ignored the people. 
People were made to worship a king as a god. This happened even during the Ramayana time itself. Raghuvamsa started quite early. 
Once a king becomes powerful, he discards the samiti but retained a sabha in a different form. He decided to make his son his successor. 
Sabha was filled with people selected by the king. People had no role here.
But the most important aspect is gurukula system was restricted to a few. Most people weren't interested in learning from a guru. So it became restricted to brahmins for scholarship and kshatriyas for warfare. Though the kshatriya concept is found in mahabharata,  many later kings were non kshatriyas . Many examples are there in history. 
So the various factors built a hierarchy of the society which is called a caste now.

From the early days , people were jealous of brahmins taking over vedic rituals . That was the reason for buddhism and jainism to develop in the country. So the first step is to create an educational system open to all that teaches samskaras , and agamas in addition to vedic hymns. Is this possible? How does a government implement this when there is not much revenue and livelihood in it. Even brahmins have stopped learning these today. So it is a big ask.  


Babu’s query of turning back the clock is not difficult. 
We need an understanding for that . 
The most important awareness is that vedas are not caste oriented . They contain a vast set of values,  processes for acquisition of knowledge , maintenance of order,good  governance , and a number of practices to live a meaningful , harmonious , sharing life. Vedas and upanishads establish many good principles for a society. 
Are we prepared to accept the above premise?
If we aren't,  then there is no possibility of going forward to build  a unified egalitarian society. 
We mingle with different types of people , different cadres of people in our profession. We get adjusted to people of different castes working with us, people of different castes staying In our neighbourhood.  We accept that. So that is a big move forward. 
If we feel that Hindu scriptures are not casteist and brahminical,  we should start learning them and introduce the best in our school curriculum. What is wrong in saying
Matru  Devo bhava
Shraddhaya deyam
Ahimsa paramo dharmaha 
Satyam vada 
Lokas samastha sukhino bhavanthu
Vasudev kutumbakam
Yogakshemam vahamyaham
Poornamidam 
Etc.
 They explain some of the universal concepts and values.
There were lot more principles and concepts about human behaviours, human well being, logic, knowledge etc and they can be taught in schools
So the only solution is to educate all on these hundreds of concepts found in vedas and upanishads and darsanas. Making people change their mindset is tough. Only education can do it. 
Ethics is never taught in schools. Niti sastras are not taught. Even Tirukkural is learnt sporadically. Why don't the Tamilnadu government introduce Tirukkural as a full subject, not as a small part of Tamil,  for three years - third to fifth classes?. 
I don't have a fully implementable  answer for your question, Babu. 
Greetings
Dks
24/04/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 693
“A Robin Red breast in a Cage Puts all Heaven in a Rage. 
A dove house fill'd with doves & Pigeons Shudders Hell thro' all its regions. 
A dog starv'd at his Master's Gate Predicts the ruin of the State. 
A Horse misus'd upon the Road Calls to Heaven for Human blood. 
Each outcry of the hunted Hare A fibre from the Brain does tear. 
A Skylark wounded in the wing, A Cherubim does cease to sing.”
William  Blake

Dr Babu's response to my post 
“Thanks a lot Dr DKS.
You have indicated the causes  and practical implementation. If these are followed the learning system will be much better.
For Tamilnadu if Thirukkural is taught as a full subject  in high school level with examination, it is indeed  a welcome change  .They may restrict with both 'Aram ( nyaya) and porul(economics) . Dharmic way of earning a living must be emphasized.

Mahendra Babu”

My response
Thanks. 
We need to teach nitisastra for all others. It is not a religious document. 


Vinod Vyasulu has another angle.
“Any comments on the current attack on Harvard University by the US President? Is it really about academic freedom or politics? Student protests about the atrocities in Gaza are being called anti semetic...a human rights  protest being made into a religious tolerance one in a highly explosive way.” 

My response
Actually that is my worry. It is destroying the foundations of university academics. It is definitely politics . 
It was well understood in India for millenia and in the west for many centuries that scholarship grows in an unfettered ambience and freedom. The Indian gurukula system emerged on the principle that the guru knows the best in jnana. Gurus gave their knowledge freely to all. There is a rigorous set of qualifications prescribed for a guru by Sankaracharya.   Academic freedom emerged in the west. England respected Oxford and Cambridge in the beginning.  Most senior government administrators and some politicians came from these two universities. Even today many universities in UK  train both administrators and politicians on several aspects and maintain their contacts with these people. So the relationship is strong. Also politicians are proud of the achievements by universities and nobel prizes  obtained by their faculty. Universities were respected. So academic freedom was permitted to produce better results. 
One of the important guiding principles ,a reason for academic freedom , is the fact that people appreciated the academics’  intellectual approaches to solve many problems facing a nation. Many academics advised governments on technology and economic matters. Academicians played a significant role in building public systems and solving serious problems like corona. 
The US almost followed that approach. Most politicians had gone to Harvard or Princeton or other universities.  They understood the importance of academics and research in the country's development.  So they adapted a hands-off approach. In addition, many faculty members join the government in senior positions for a short period. Faculty play an influencing role in the country's governance, economy and growth. 
Other countries followed. So there is a very strong academic culture and independence existing in most universities even today. 
But with the current administration,  universities are not considered important . That is dangerous. A great many centuries old tradition is under threat. 
But is the government the only entity responsible for this situation ? 
My answer is no. Academics moved away from fairness, truth and Justice. They became biased , left leaning and highly egocentric and scholarship was not a high priority focus in many universities across the world today. 
France is bringing legislation to reduce the biases. They are reworking the freedom of speech range. 
To me biased academics are more dangerous than interference by the government.  Many universities, particularly the technology based ones, were reasonably rational and objective, but not the liberal arts ones. 
Let me define what academic freedom is.
According to google
Academic freedom: is the freedom of teachers, students, and academic institutions to pursue knowledge wherever it may lead, without undue or unreasonable interference 
or restriction from law, institutional regulations, or public pressure.
French statute law declares about higher education that "teachers-researchers (university professors and assistant professors), researchers and teachers are fully independent and enjoy full freedom of speech in the course of their research and teaching activities, provided they respect, following university traditions and the dispositions of this code, principles of tolerance and objectivity".
The German Constitution (German: Grundgesetz) specifically grants academic freedom: "Art and science, research and teaching are free. Freedom of teaching does not absolve from loyalty to the constitution" 
I define academic freedom as
“Creation of an ambience conducive to learning, teaching, research activities performed by faculty and students without fear , biases but committed to truth and integrity .“ 
What is ambience ?
Peace in the campus
Intellectual and questioning atmosphere
Fairness ,truthfulness, academic commitments  and integrity 
Freedom from the  fear of slavery of dominant groups , from unfair dismissals, 
Freedom to perform academic duties, to discuss, to allow for many views 
No admin control of academic processes
Financial Support from government 
Today's concerns are 
1.actions by governments 
2.actions by university administration
3. Politicalization of university ambience 
4.private management's insensitive ,slave driven approach to academics
5. Selling education as a commodity. 
6. Avoiding laws and constitutional obligations.
Let me look at the Indian scene in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
25/04/25, 4:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 694
Let me look at some aspects of academic freedom. 
First factor is fear. I see fear pervades in most institutions in India even now.  Till the end of the 19th century all higher education was controlled by Britishers.indians were slaves. So there was no academic freedom in Indian universities. There was no respect and no understanding of scholarship. The only exception I see is Ramanujan , the mathematics genius. The other aspect of scholarship I perceive is scholarship in sanskrit and some Indian languages. 
The situation took one step forward with great sparks of Indian scholarship in the early part of the 20th century. We know of C V Raman, K S Krishnan, S Radhakrishnan, TMP Mahadevan, Hiriyanna, AL Mudaliyar, and many more. 
What was the state at iisc during this period 1909 to 1945. It was the same as that of all Indian universities- Dominance by a few british professors and indian faculty members were not treated as equals. CV Raman was the first Indian to become director of IISc. The British professors didn't like it. They connived to get him dismissed as director , a black mark. The reason- Raman invited Max Born to visit iisc. So he was called a traitor to British government and removed as director. That was the state of academic freedom at iisc at that time. But there is a big difference between iisc and indian universities.  Academic research and scholarship. IISc focused on research and excellence in learning. That was consistent throughout the period of its existence and continues even now. 
When India got independence, the universities moved into top gear by respecting academic work and expertise . But fear persisted. So academic freedom was restricted to only a few. The fight between Prof GN Ramachandran and A Ramakrishnan was well known. Ramakrishnan had to leave the Madras university and start a separate institute . 
Academic freedom stayed up to the professors level in most public institutions like universities and government colleges till the sixties. But scholarship and research were getting recognition in both academic and government circles. But slavery persists in private institutions even now. Remember there are thousands of private universities and colleges now. Faculty are insulted , dismissed and spied upon by the managements.  So the concept of academic freedom is not appreciated in India except in a few places. 
The second major aspect for a working freedom is the processes for selection of students and faculty, recognition of good work and incentives and freedom to conduct research . A just set of processes should be defined for all and several consultative bodies With powers and responsibilities defined. IISc had a well defined set of bodies like governing council, court, senate , faculties , curriculum committee etc which have mostly academic members except council which has some administrators. Council is the Apex body. All matters are taken to the appropriate bodies for decisions. So transparency and participation  exist in governance. There are hundreds of subcommittees at both department and central levels. So a good consultative process is built. While the council, senate and faculties existed for a long time, most committees and structures came into existence from the sixties. A lot of flexibilities have been built in operating systems . 
Selections of faculties and students and promotions follow rigorous defined processes with the involvement of professors and external experts. 
I consider this as an ideal academic freedom.  A good structure, a well defined set of rules, a participative and transparent governance system and a strong academic ambience reduces the anxiety and fear in the stakeholders and allows the free growth of scholarship. That is a good prescription for both academic and administrative autonomy. Some IITs follow similar systems. Central universities have a reasonable degree of autonomy ,but not in the state governed universities.  
You don't find it in any other universities or institutions in India. 
Let me continue further in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
26/04/25, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 695
“A book is written when there is something specific that has to be discovered. The writer doesn’t know what it is, nor where it is, but knows it has to be found. The hunt then begins. The writing begins.”
—Roberto Calasso, The Celestial Hunter

We saw the evolution of processes for academic freedom at iisc . I played a major role working in many committees and helping in the generation of policies . 
These efforts helped in transparency . There is no fear at iisc. Most have good freedom to pursue their academic work. 
Let me tell you how this freedom and more than that a great encouragement helped me in getting involved not only in most activities - not just day to day, but even creation of new innovations, - at iisc, but even at the national level. 
This academic freedom helped me
To conduct my academic activities like teaching ,research, lectures , participation in conferences, working groups , meetings - at inter institutional levels, at government level, at industry level, and at public professional institutional level. It helped me to grow in all directions and reach good levels. 
To participate in several national programs in power, energy, environment, computers and IT sectors in a significant way.
To participate in promoting Computer education in many institutions.
To develop and promote computer and IT culture in many institutions , government departments,  industries , banks etc. To assist in the transformation of many businesses to IT and digital era. 
To lecture in more than 400 institutions and hundreds of schools in rural areas. 
To conduct several major and large projects like Mahithisindhu, TCS sysgel,  DOS CoWAA, many corebanking and IT transformation projects in many banks, ERP selection and assessment for many organizations, modernization of electric power systems at IISc,  JNCASR, Vidhanasoudha, Jayadeva etc, advising on networking in more than 30 institutions and many banks, and many more . I learnt a lot about the distance between academia and practical implementation processes. 
To train  thousands of teachers , computer engineers, power engineers working in power boards and industries , IAS, IFS officers, and thousands of students. 
To play a big role in remodeling curriculum in several universities , institutions and colleges.
To help in inculcating research culture in many universities and colleges. 
To participate in several reforms in the higher education sector.

I could achieve a holistic life and  a fulfilling life, possible because of the  autonomy and ambience provided and actively nurtured at IISc IISc gave me purposes in life.I should remember some stalwarts at this time - Sir CV Raman ,who diversified science to include Physics,  Prof Dhawan, responsible for reforms and all round growth, Prof M S Thacker who brought in several engineering disciplines into the institute and made it a strong engineering institution, Prof  Ramseshan , who expanded the institute with ten new centres and visualised a supercomputer facility, and many Others.

We saw that academic autonomy needs administrative autonomy. It also needs another important component- financial autonomy. That is being attacked by the current US administration.  
Financial autonomy Is a must for academics to flourish. This is the biggest hurdle for all public universities in India and also in the universities everywhere. Universities never addressed this issue. Universities give a high quality and highly subsidised education to its students. Many climb up  the success ladder , but most Alumni don't fund their universities. That is a tragedy. Just like we have a law for industries to spend a part of their profit on charitable purposes through corporate social responsibility law, we need a law for past students to refund a part of the subsidy spent on them back to the university. 
We expect a highly subsidised education , but why don't we return the subsidies enjoyed by us back to the university? 
But the biggest problem , a problem more difficult to solve, to achieve autonomy is the mindset changes required amidst academics in our colleges and universities. We need commitment and integrity for academic principles and work. We should shed diffidence,  excuse mentality, and fear. We should establish independence , curiosity and critical thinking . 
It is the duty of every academic in our education system to get interested , get involved and work to improve autonomies and take academic independence to a higher level. 
That completes my discussions on academic freedom. 
Thanks Ramanathan,Vinod, Babu  and Sanjay for pushing these discussions. 
Greetings
Dks
27/04/25, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 696
“For if medicine is really to accomplish its great task, it must intervene in political and social life. It must point out the hindrances that impede the normal social functioning of vital processes, and effect their removal.”
—Rudolf Virchow, nineteenth-century German physician

Let me return to learning. 
Let me elaborate: what is learning now? 
A comprehensive  answer is:
Access , avoid errors, connect the dotted and undotted lines,  assimilate , adapt , extend , clarify.  analyse outputs, characteristics, impacts etc, adjust or improve, integrate,  apply, model  , design , decide and solve problems, innovate , discover. 
This means that learning is not a simple discipline. 

Learning is a multistage Process. You learn step by step, uncover new connectivities, integrate, get holistic views, discover new facts, analyse . Normally most people stay in the first stage - learn what is enough to survive - to get a job, to get along with others , to do tasks correctly. This stage doesn’t help one to deal with uncertain situations , complexities. It is more a frog in the well life. 
But a human can think ,can ask questions. So the second stage takes us through a number of tools to access,  absorb, analyse knowledge . This is the period where one learns a language, reasoning skills, mathematics, basics of universe , life and living and understands governance and social behaviours. This is done through a formal school or gurukula method where a teacher tells you the methods, encourages you to ask questions , and clarifies your doubts. 
Third stage takes us through more of the skills . 
But it is the fourth stage which is important. 
One learns through two methods. All of us follow one method - observe , read, listen, experiment ,analyse, and apply facts. This is the external method. One is guided by others - parents, relatives, neighbours, teachers , coworkers, etc - . Ninety nine percent of people follow this route. 
There is a second step here - get into a reading habit. This is the start of the second method. Calming the mind through meditation is the basic requirement. Reading, understanding , appreciation and application are  mostly the first level of the internal learning process. One is encouraged by others in these activities and one can get external help here.
Second level of internal learning is to cultivate four important habits. 
1.observation
2.questioning 
3.analysis and decision making 
4.thinking 
Each one has several levels - from simple outward looking level ,to finding errors and correct our data, to analysis, to establish connectivities, to open up new avenues, to find solutions , 
All of us start at this level from childhood and go through life using these techniques throughout our life. But the level of getting a mastery of these four habits varies from person to person. Unfortunately it is assumed that everyone can acquire these four traits . So our education system - both formal and informal ones- don't help you to develop these habits. One has to learn these through conscious efforts. The internal processes need to be developed by one according to one's capabilities. 
The next higher level is self realization. That is the area our upanishads concentrate on. It is not clear how one gets into this level. Very few get into this internal self learning level. It is an intense self Learning activity ,not well defined.
Greetings 
Dks
28/04/25, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 697
“To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,  
 All pray in their distress, 
And to these virtues of delight 
  Return their thankfulness.
 For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,   Is God our Father dear; 
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,   Is man, his child and care.
William Blake 

Learning is a complex ,multidimensional ,lifelong series of activities. One acquires knowledge from everything - not every person but everything is a teacher-, 
sharpens them ,
adds more to the already collected knowledge- that is one grows knowledge like a tree-, 
Understands what is acquired ,
applies knowledge in many situations happening in one's life, society , and jobs 
And
Develops new knowledge - inventions, discoveries etc. 
So learning is as essential to a person as eating to survive. Eating and its scarcity are visible - hunger, obesity , poverty , malnutrition etc. But the impacts of learning are only partially visible to us through schooling , formal education, skills etc. The invisible part should be told explicitly for us to understand the importance of jnana. The question is
What converts  an educated person into an intellectual person? It obviously goes beyond formal education and degrees. The educated have to fill many gaps in their learning. 
Some people look at a few utilitarian gaps - lack of applications, no practical experience, poor problem solving skills, and even poor communications skills . There are discussions on these aspects by many learned persons like Narayana Murthy, his friend Mohandas Pai and now Mr Sridhar Vembu . They all think the main objective of education is skills generation. But with robotics and AI ,many experiences and many skills will become obsolete. We see coding activities are dying leaving millions out of jobs. 
So let us look at the two questions:
1  What should be the objectives of learning ? 2.what are the hidden gaps in our education system ? 
While these two can be analysed to some extent, finding remedial measures- i call them foundations of learning , or foundations of awakening and improving our consciousness-  and implementing them are not easy. They need strong commitments and qualities. 
I have discussed the objectives of learning already. Let me amplify that. 
First axiom 
Objectives of learning should align with objectives of a balanced life- material, spiritual, personal, family, society , and nature based components  .
So the question becomes - what are the objectives in one's life  whether one should live like a farmer, clerk, officer, teacher, scholar , researcher?
There are many requirements to lead a satisfactory life. I am looking at some requirements that prepare us to meet uncertain situations. 
One requirement is evident - 
Life is changing - we are seeing the changes in the past 50 years . 
Changes bring in new lifestyles and they bring in new requirements whether you are a farmer or scholar. Whatever techniques were applied before a change may not be useful after the change. This needs to be understood and accepted by educationists. 
Our education system failed in this important litmus test. It doesn't address changes, accept changes, develop ways of meeting changes and provide the necessary skills to students. It is doing it partially and there are   big gaps there.
Let me take a familiar example.
Computers and IT brought in a lot of changes In our life directly or indirectly. Let me look at the question : How prepared were we to adapt to these changes? That will give us a clue and many learnings that can be adapted for future changes. 
When computers appeared in the country in mid sixties, there were few academics even in IISc who were aware of it and fewer like me used computers. I could count a few - about 4 who used computers in iisc till 1970. I was the only one to teach computer courses almost at par with their developments. I taught operating systems in 1968  just when it was being developed by IBM. But the situation in iisc didn't change till 1975. The situation was better at IIT Kanpur and Bombay. IIT Madras started computer science  by 1970 only . So the best academic institutions were behind by more than a decade. Normal colleges started computer science by 1985 or later . They were behind by two to three decades. 
But the worst was the situation with software. IISc professors said in the late 1970s that software is not an engineering subject , this in open faculty / senate meetings. The situation was the worst in most institutions. They concentrated in programming - writing a 20 line code focusing on logic . Large scale programming - writing 50k lines- was questioned even in 2008. Only Dhamdhere built a compiler. I ,from the beginning, insisted on my students to build large programs in 1970 itself. I also developed two languages - cospro for simulation and sysgel for software automation. 
The story with PCs was similar - a decade or more lag for academics to know them. 
We completely missed the Internet bus. That was a tragedy. 
A good learning system should reduce technical content and focus on predictive and development systems. 
We need to address these requirements . That is a big ask in today's transformative life . 
Let me list the requirements. 
Understand changes happening by looking around - so a broad , generalised knowledge is a must , not a specialised skill alone.  We need a new course on change management. The 21st century has moved towards agile and continuous innovation . We should think seriously about how we move and change to meet the volatility of the world. 
Look at what are the characteristics required to adapt to a change. I call this as human engineering.  Prepare to change yourself. 
Predict changes - get social and society transformational knowledge. Learn look ahead techniques from past movements. This is where intellectual scholarship , thinking , and good analysis capabilities will be useful. 
Change yourself by relearning .
Accelerate the change . Develop new methods to adapt changes in many processes, prepare people to accept these changes , find alternatives, and teach the impacts. 

Greetings
Dks
29/04/25, 3:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 698
A more free-wheeling, anarchic organization is the secret of our greater capacities of creativity, imagination, thinking outside the box and all that, and the price we pay for it is our susceptibility to obsessions, mental illnesses, delusions, and smaller problems.
 We got risky brains.
Brockman.     Thinking

We saw that the main objective of learning is to aid and direct the purpose of life. 
In today's fast changing world, we need a futuristic Outlook. It will answer the question - what next? This implies 
Looking at the next five years - it takes three to five years for a change to start and settle down and also it takes three years to prepare for the incoming change - to relearn. 
Knowing what might happen in the next five years. Will my job be there ? Will my money be there ? 
Plan to be prepared for the change. It is a constant lifelong process. 
We all should become change managers. 
I recall the beautiful story.  
Three fishes were living in a small pond. One day ,they heard two people saying that the pond will be drained of water shortly. Land grabbing was common then also. 
One fish decided to take advance action and moved to another pond. Another fish waited and left as soon as it sensed the start of the draining operation. The third complacent fish stayed and died. 
A simple story,  but a powerful learning. 
This shows that we can't be complacent, but always alert and active. 
Don't be a frog in the well, look outside, see what is happening,  understand what is needed and act. This is what Prof Clayton Christensen called as disruptive innovation in businesses.
If you think I am fussy and life is fine, let me tell you - what happened to me and to many around me. 
When I was in the engineering college in 1962, i was studying vacuum tube electronics and built many circuits using these tubes. 
When I joined iisc in 1967, i started learning transistor electronics. Concepts were different and I had to forget most valve circuit theory. 
But in 1968, I found switching circuits and logic. I had to move from analog to digital electronics. Visualising a transistor as a switch was a major change . I realised transistors are magicians with many avatars . They act as rectifiers, high frequency amplifiers and oscillators and also switches. They were used in analog and digital circuits. Then I learnt they are used in computing. It is not learning as a bystander, but to design and build systems , which is deep learning. 
Within a year , i was looking at ICs and large computers. That was the transformation happening in the sixties. 
Similarly, i moved up the programming language ladder - machine language to assembly and autocoder to Fortran to Cobol, Pascal to C, and Java to Python - all self taught and learned. 
That capability should be built in children.
The best example for change management is the stock market brokers, advisors and investors - they have to be on their toes, their concept of fundamentals changes regularly, they have to be nimble, they should know the market every minute as the market is dynamic  , they should act quickly and can't wait , they should not count their chickens - their success or failure should not be counted every day ,but over a longer period. 
We need to learn several qualities from them - which a broker teaches his son from his childhood. 
hunger for correct knowledge at every instance - it is a constant hunger not quenched easily. Data dependent. 
      2.  A totally outward world wide look at many markets 
     3.  Detailed studies of markets, impacts due to political happening , impacts due to demands, impacts due to other country markets. 
    4. analysis without rules . Invent on your feet. 
    5.  flexibility to change the methods 
agility in actions . Try to do something new every week. Plan for every week, not just school timetable 
but financial planning and time planning.
networking , communications.
Quick decision making , take responsibility, don't delay , time is money.
Gita ‘s philosophy - nishkama karma - don't worry about results . Failures are part of the game.



Look at a lawyer. He gets a change of task at regular intervals. Each case needs learnings to understand , referencing past judgments and agileness to respond to arguments in the court. It is another effective change managing profession. 
The other example is a politician. He needs to study unknowns - people's feelings, emotions, needs etc. He should build a case for votes not just money for votes. He should rebut the arguments of others, play on the emotions of people ,play up injustices - Garibi  hatao of Indira Gandhi is a good example. They act like a behaviour expert, psychologist, communications expert, networking specialist, economist, advertiser , futurist etc, a multidimensional personality. All these are needed for survival. 
Let us put our children in uncertain situations by creating some uncertainties like no food one night . Let us follow the merchants, lawyers and politicians and train our children. Kids gloves are off now. No cuddling , pampering and destroying our children. Train them to face the future.
Greetings 
Dks.
30/04/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 699

Let me continue  discussions on  my learning  process. 
As I repeatedly stated , I learnt from every person , every book , magazines and news sources. I also observed others activities and learnt from their approaches . When I say I learnt , it meant absorbing ideas, concepts  and methods and following them as far as possible. It also meant generating beliefs and habits. 
While in general ,the above statements are true , I had some influencers whom I respected and listened to and absorbed some of their qualities . I talked about my grandmother and my maternal uncle as my great influencers . Let me talk about my grandfather. He didn't live long, he died when I was ten or eleven and my interactions with him were not many and  happened on a few occasions. 
He was a scholar in many languages - Tamil, Malayalam and Sanskrit. He has read many sastras and ithihasas. He used to deliver lectures every day. Many people from different castes consulted him regularly. He led a stable and very frugal life. 
He lived far away from our place - about 200 plus miles from my village. I visited him a few times and he visited the village several times at least once a year till he passed away. Normally he stayed for a week or more. Twice, he stayed for 15 days - both times to perform the death ceremonies of his mother and Wife, that is my grandmother. 
We were scared of him. But he was kind to me , talked to me softly and kindly. He enquired about me . Normally , there will be several men sitting with him including my father and uncles. I observed his interactions with my uncle. That interested me a lot. I respected both. Both of them had a great respect for each other. While my grandfather was spiritually and religiously inclined, he left all matters relating to land , money to my uncle. He listened to my uncle. He also lost a lot of money which He loaned to two well known people - one was a rich man . They put the money in about 60 acres of land which went into litigation. The rich man became poor. My grandfather lost his money. After that he entrusted everything to my uncle. 
 My uncle used to tell me that my grandfather was his guru. Their discussions were serious. I listened to a lot of stories from him. My grandfather gave about 4to 5 talks in the village. I attended the talks and listened to his talks. 
Even though the time I spent with him was short, it gave me an appreciation of the values he discussed and practised - simple and frugal living, concern for others, serious interest in sastras, no gossips, effort needed to improve cognition. That is why I call him and influencer - a presentation day term. He would have given thousands of such talks and definitely many thousands would have listened to him and benefitted from his lectures. He introduced some freedom fighters in his talks and even permitted Subramania Bharati's  songs to be sung in his meetings. 
I had met later, in the late fifties , Mr Dikshitar who was an MLA from cheranmahadevi constituency during two train travels. He told me that he was encouraged by my grandfather to participate in the freedom struggle. He said he used to sing Bharathi’s  songs during  the lectures . Fortunately they were ignored by the authorities. 
At that period , we were under british rule . So such talks were not encouraged by the British.  

Lateron there were no influencers from whom I can learn .   There were only advisors , mostly relatives and teachers. 
Let me look at my next transformation point . I moved to St Xaviers college in Palayamkottai for my college education - initially for PUC. This introduced many changes in my life . I became independent. I managed the household - mostly buying groceries and managing money independently. I admitted my sister to school. We three of us lived in a house. My father visited us regularly and my grandmother also visited us occasionally. I visited regularly my uncle's house in Tirunelveli, a couple of miles away. Town bus service was available. All places are within walking distance. 
The second transformation was the fact that the medium of education shifted to English. My class had a strength of 100 - a big change from 30. It is a mixed class with about 50% Christians. So there were many adjustment problems , but I had no problems. I got into the system quickly. 
I participated actively in several topics like English, History, and Logic . I realised my potential in maths - I got 100% in all tests. I came overall  first in the class exams. I was liked by the rector and principal, Fr Soosai, the vice principal, and most teachers . I thoroughly enjoyed my studies. 
All these happened within a month of joining the college and changing three houses. 
This proved that my adaptation capabilities to new situations were good even at that time. That wasn't considered normal particularly when I saw many students struggling to understand the lectures in English . I was astonished that I could manage to listen the lectures, understand what the teacher spoke , ask questions and participate in the discussions - all these without difficulty . There were mostly short cryptic text books without explanations. But I managed easily.   
Let us look at more of this transformation in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
01/05/25, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 700
One major transformation that happened during this period of 1958 to 59 was my interest and understanding of British classic literature. My English teacher was remarkable. He used to tell many anecdotes about Boswell and Johnson , Goldsmith ,  Thomas Hardy, Thackeray,  etc. My reading of English books started with classics motivated by him .  I read several books during this one year and built an interest and taste in English literature. The college library had a number of books ,so I could borrow and read them . 
Also we had a relative , Mr Ramanathan, my aunt's brother, living in Palayamkottai. He was a very simple person without ambitions and expectations . He used to help a lot of people. He also helped us a lot during our stay . He resolved many problems we faced. His brothers in law studied in St Xavier's college . They had collected and read a lot of books and left them in his house. So I picked up books from his house and read them. Most were English classics. So I cultivated a different aptitude of reading and appreciating English books , a shift from reading hundreds of Tamil books during high school days. 
But those Tamil novels were very useful in my learning process. I learnt about our multidimensional social novel through them. Kalki taught me Tamil history and he also taught me about our independence struggle. I also learnt about life in villages, cities, big cities like Bombay,  Delhi, Burma  etc from his novels. Though i hadn't visited Bombay at that time, i knew about VT, church gate, marine drive, dadar, matunga, etc at that time through talks with visitors and stories from books.  I learnt a lot about famous people through reading biographies . It was Sundaram's biography that introduced me to yoga, healthy living , Ulsoor and bangalore. 
But the English books took me to English villages and London.  I got the best picture of London and its pie soup fog from Sherlock home stories. Dickens' great expectations was a great read and also Mark Twain's Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn . 
But the major transformation was my mindset changes. I broadened my understanding of people, the world , and religion. But I moved away from religious rituals to spiritualism.  That meant that I developed an enquiring mind - skepticism , questioning, analysing , accepting correct beliefs, not criticising others beliefs and tolerances. I also developed a deep thinking habit. Surprisingly , I was not afraid of unknown disciplines. I was prepared to learn new topics. I never hated any subject. All these habits stayed with me till now. My learning of Sanskrit and Hindi came to a halt. 
This was the period when I made up my mind on  my future plans.  I didn't want to BSc but wanted to do engineering.  That goal got confirmed. I needed to find ways to achieve my goal - I had no idea how to go for engineering education.  My knowledge was nil . I started looking at colleges and their locations. 
I saw at close quarters my younger uncle struggling to get admissions into MSc. So I knew that getting a seat in engineering wasn't easy. I found out that there are two engineering colleges nearby - one at Karaikudi, another at Madurai, this being a new one. I decided on Madurai. 
Luckily the process of selection was streamlined with a centralised interview process from that year. That helped me to get admissions. 
Greetings
Dks
02/05/25, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 701
Two statements in my post 700 elicited queries.
Thiruvelan , my BE classmate wanted to know ,” who is this Sundaram”.
My response 
“He was a yoga teacher in the forties and fifties.  He lived in Ulsoor. His name as i remember is yogacharya sundaram.He wrote his biography in Tamil about his life and best practices to live. He described life in Ulsoor which was a Tamil dominated area then . It was part of Madras presidency then and not part of Mysore .I don't remember any details about his biography . But yoga was an interest of mine and I used to read about Yoga. Even Kalki mentioned about Yoga practices and that his son Rajendran was not well and so got him to do yoga. 
I learnt a lot about Pranayama from sundaram's book . Another person whose work interested me was Swami Sivananda.  My father visited him in Rishikesh and gave a series of talks. Swami sivananda gave him a title, “ Pravachana Ratna”. Swami Chinmayananda was his disciple.  He popularised Bhagavad Gita.  I listened to his lectures. 
That is all in my memory now. But he opened two  worlds for me - yoga, proper living in addition to creating an awareness in bangalore. 
Greetings 
Dks
Ther is a second query referring to my statement about  shifting from religious practices  to the spiritual aspects. Mr Srinivasan ,PNB enquired about it. 
Let me clarify and clear misunderstandings. 
Let us start with - What is religion? Let me give three  definitions. This is a generic definition ,may not apply fully to sanatana dharma. 
1.Oxford Dictionary defines religion as the belief in and/or worship of a superhuman controlling power, especially a personal God or gods.
2.religion, - human beings' relation to that which they regard as holy, sacred, absolute, spiritual, divine, or worthy of especial reverence
3."A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to. say, things set apart and forbidden .
The religion is divided into two broad  parts - operative part - beliefs and practices and scholarly part - philosophy, we call this vedanta or sastras or darsanas .
Each part may have subdivisions. Practices may include prayers, pujas,  festivals, pilgrimages, temple visits, samskaras etc. 
Normally practices include human values and ethics . These are not enforced. 
Practices include many defined rituals and code of conduct - sadachara-, involving  people, gurus, astrologers, sastric scholars , priests etc. 
While I was religious during the earlier years , i was attracted by upanishads and felt that they play an important role in understanding the purpose of a society, codes of conduct, values, scholarship etc. They make you think, analyse and understand many deep concepts. They provide a great opportunity to explore a whole new universe. 
Spiritualism according to me is to know and understand and follow the meaning of life, purposes and goals in life , appropriate actions , Acquisition of knowledge- jnana, finding the correctness and clarity in beliefs and actions. It implies that materialism is to be ignored , worry is to be avoided, emotions are to be controlled, thoughts and actions should be pure and benevolent,  and belief should be in values , order, truth, ahimsa, harmony .  Spiritualism implies respect to every aspect of nature, protection and conservation. 
Importantly spiritualism does not say ,starve . You don't give primacy to wealth. You earn to have a frugal life , not a flashy rich ,consumption oriented life.
Spiritualism doesn’t say , take sanyas,  but try to think good, speak good and do good most of the time. 
I don't say that i followed all these principles. I keep them with me , think of them when I act and do my best to correct myself when I deviate from these principles. 
Hope my concept of spiritualism is clear. 
Best way of differentiating between religious practices and spiritualism is to look at the philosophies of Sankaracharya and Ramanujacharya. 
Welcome discussions. I want to look at the queries of Mr Sambamurthy on this in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
03/05/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 702
“It is institutions that help us to preserve decency. They need our help as well. Do not speak of “our institutions” unless you make them yours by acting on their behalf. Institutions do not protect themselves. They fall one after the other unless each is defended from the beginning. So choose an institution you care about a court, a newspaper, a law, a labor union—and take its side.”
Timothy Snyder 

“Most of the power of authoritarianism is freely given. In times like these, individuals think ahead about what a more repressive government will want, and then offer themselves without being asked. A citizen who adapts in this way is teaching power what it can do.”
Timothy Snyder.   Tyranny

Mr Sambamurthy had a few perceptive comments :
 A senior executive working for Arms manufacturer objected to this.

We have plenty of projects to build physical and digital infrastructure projects to connect people. We need Spiritual infrastructure projects.

: Dear DKS,
You made significant contribution to building Physical and Digital infrastructure.
You are well placed to help build Spiritual infrastructure project as well.
I do discern some such insights in your WhatsApp posts.

He recently posted another related  comment 
“Technological evolution is outpacing or has  already outpaced emotional and spiritual evolution. What are the negative consequences and how to mitigate them?
Appreciate your comments.
Thank you DKS.”

My response 
Well . Very thoughtful comments  with deep anguish that i see in these comments. Your concern for spiritualism is very necessary today. 
Let me discuss human life as envisaged by our dharma . 
Human life evolved from a survival mode of live to eat scenario to a technologically advanced complex and complicated life structure today. As you expressed , our dharmic concerns are very relevant today. 
Sanatana dharma envisages the following principles for a proper living. 
Life is a balancing act of many paths - karma ,the path of duty, bhakti, the path of religion, and jnana, the path of knowledge. Normally, a subsidiary path is added that of artha , wealth. 
But the most important aspect of overseeing actions of these four directions is dharma. Dharma means a very detailed set of  codes of conduct for proper living . It speaks about :
1.Healthy life practices - yoga , meditation, prayer, satvik food , emotions control, proper behaviours and conduct , etc. Both upanishads and yoga sutra talk about human systems and yoga in detail. The essential and central force is the mind - mind makes a human. There are discussions on developing a healthy and open mind. Our dharma says an unhealthy mind is dangerous.  They suggest ways of developing a healthy mind. That is the basis of a human. 
Our dharma is based on the axiom - you can modify yourself, you can change yourself. You can improve yourself and others.  
Self improvement , constant improvements, changes in living according to the changing world conditions , societal improvements - all these possible and it  should be the constant endeavor of everyone to adapt to the improvements.
Many rules have been defined to conduct oneself. 

2. Knowledge acquisition and learning - questioning, seriousness, concentration, contemplation, clarity in communications, thinking, enquiry, self learning, reasoning arguing and logic etc. Learning and gaining wisdom is considered the highest form of living. So there is a lot of emphasis on this aspect.There is a vast source of literature dealing with this. Our sastras emphasize the following important aspects of knowledge - 
-Knowledge is free 
-Respect knowledge 
- Knowledge is connected,  just like the human body is connected. 
-Clarity is important. Speak clearly. 
-Use multiple skills - perceptions, analysis, detailed observations, experiences, experiments, logical explanations, rebuttals of contradictions , completeness of definitions.
-Get knowledge from all sources . Analyse the facts and ascertain their validity , their characteristics, applications , their place in reality and their truthfulness etc. Nyaya and uttara mimamsa focus on proving assertions.  
-Give knowledge to others - share it. 
- Accept errors . Avoid ego . 
There are many more aspects dealing with different kinds of knowledge- para and apara-, absolute truth , unreality of worldly knowledge,  etc.
These scholars are the custodians of knowledge- sastras and interpreters of concepts. 
3.proper duties to family - samsara dharma . Artha and kama define the activities in this phase of life. While primary purpose is ensuring the continuity of human race, secondary purposes are 
Bringing up children  properly 
Taking care of samskaras 
Taking care of the welfare of all 
Earn your living . Live within your means ,in a frugal manner. 
No lavish living 
No greedy,  aspirational living 
Be a Roman in Rome. Follow the procedures specified for you at various stages in the smritis .

the samsara stage is considered  an essential stage. Multiple professions are suggested to individuals  . No one should be  idle and live a useless life. 
.

4. Duties to nature - respect nature, natural forces, avoid consumption. Nature belongs to god. Use it in a frugal and sacrificial mode. Protect nature. Show your gratitude to nature and natural forces. 
5. Duties to society - maintain order, help the society to lead a harmonious life. Share resources . Conduct properly and pleasantly. 
6. Duties of a king
7. How to address changes in lifestyle - four ashramas.  
8. Religious practices - there are three  kinds of activities - 
Bhakti cult - prayer , more individuals and community oriented 
Recital of vedas and conduct of yagas - sroutis - Shruti,  vedas based activities.
Temple rituals, samskaras , astrology etc. - smrithi based activities 
One should have a proper combination of these three paths in one's life. That is what I call multidimensional life. 
But what is the supervisor of a person to foresee that these paths are traversed correctly and properly ? That is dharma and let us call it spirituality. That is the operating system for humans that should govern them. But we have a corrupted operating system or none. Let us reconstruct and reboot this OS.
All actions of people are governed by dharma. But we ignored that.
As you rightly said we took the arthic  part seriously and ignored the dharmic part. That is the trouble. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
04/05/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 703

Spirituality means manythings to many people. There are different perceptions:
1.it is the power to talk to the spirits. 
2.it is the power to do mysterious acts like bringing a linga from nowhere or pouring a lot of stones into someone's house. 
3.it is the deep religious power of doing pujas. 
4. There are some who believe doing deep dyana or tapas is spirituality. 
But my perception of spirituality is different . I have two views or two levels of spirituality. 
First set of understandings:
Spirituality is not related to relation.
It is related to the mind.
Spirituality is building a good daivatva in oneself.
Spirituality has many dimensions. 
Spirituality coexists with our paths of jnana,  bhakti , karma and Artha.  It controls them.
Spirituality has many levels . One can keep moving up the ladder. Many stay at a lower level. A very few people  reach higher levels. 
Spirituality is gaining through acquiring many desirable habits and renouncing many undesirable habits. 
Self learning, self understanding and self realization is at a very high level.
Definition
The first type of  definition is the dharmic level: 
 I consider a person a spiritual person if he follows dharmic principles of good habits, pleasant behaviours, control of emotions,  open, flexible  and healthy mind, helping others, respect to every person and nature, gratitude, non violence, minimal desires and frugalism, aiming for truthful behaviour, following a set of laws to be a good member of the society etc. 
The basic tenet is selflessness - every action is pursued in the nishkama Karma principle . Gandhi said end alone is not important , means are more important. 
True ,it is not easy for everyone to follow all principles - but we have seen many who obeyed some core principles 
Selfless life
Minimal wants, frugal living
Not hurting any person or anything
Good and pleasant manners
Truthfulness
And we can say they are Spiritual.  
Some names come to my  mind - Ramana Maharshi, Kanchi Chandrasekara Saraswati swamiji , many saints in history  etc. They are jnanis, spiritualism at the highest level.
Gandhi had some qualities of spiritualism ,but he was thinking he was right and others were wrong and wanted everyone to follow his path. His tolerance was low. Single track mind is not a desirable feature of spiritualism. 
Abdul Kalam led a simple ,frugal, non greedy life , highly motivated and can be considered to be Spiritual. 
I consider highly motivated persons of great integrity as Spiritual. One name that comes to my mind is Prof. Dhawan . He wasn't religious, had communist thinking , but his clarity of thought, integrity, dedication,  and commitment are commendable. Prof AR Vasudeva murthy is another name that comes to my mind. He was  a good scholar in Sanskrit, a great researcher in chemistry , and led a simple life. I knew him in many ways - he taught me materials science , I worked with him in the hostel, and had many Spiritual interactions with him. Prof R Narasimha is another Spiritual person in my list. He had deep knowledge in sastras, a highly enquiring and open mind, a great commitment to research , a great scholar and a good friend and advisor. Discussions with him were great experiences.
I would rate most women with deep commitments to the well being of family and friends  without ill wills , desires and without gossiping tendencies as good candidates for spiritualism . 
I should confess to the fact that a large number of people that  I met with  in the industries, banks , colleges , a few politicians and governments had strong Spiritual inclinations. 
My first view of spirituality is that our paths - karmic, bhakti, jnana, arthic - are enveloped in a number of layers of dharmic principles like onion skins. 
You do your tasks but see that it is governed by Dharmic principles at every stage. Researchers have a major responsibility to see that what they produce will not harm people, animals, plants and nature. 
Most stayed at the start of spirituality. They had no greed, no violent actions, proper manners, satisfied with their life and humble - the first step. They had to go miles . Let us see the miles next.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
05/05/25, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 704

It is not difficult to develop the first level of societal structure which imbibes a Spiritual Purpose in our life. It balanced both material and human components well. This was the Indian tradition till the beginning of the 19th century. Our gurukula system implemented education on spiritual topics . 
But remember that spirituality has four major dimensions 
Human , ethical dimension 
Mental development 
Knowledge dimension 
Consciousness dimension.  

We Need to see how people climb this ladder, that is our objective. The first question - do we have enough source materials to guide us ? The answer is yes  . Let us look at them.

Fortunately , India had a very long , glorious and very strong tradition of spirituality spanning over 3000 years.  
When Vedas were developed , they were not purely religious documents. They were holistic sastras  dealing with many aspects - nature and natural forces , their impacts and uses in our life, our gratitude to nature,
 human life, purposes, meaning, habits,  practices, ideals, daivatva, 
 societal living, order, organization , harmony, sharing , etc
Knowledge - sources, types, methods of learning, truth, guru shishya tradition, 
eternal search, quest for new knowledge 
universe , evolution, temporariness of life 
Brahman 
Religious practices
Planets, their positions 
Mathematics , geometry, number systems etc 
Metallurgy , thermodynamics . 
So vedas were holistic. Vedas talked about several rishis - both male and female. Many gurus had established schools from that time onwards. 
 Based on vedas, upanishads developed and then came darsana sastras. They provided several views of spirituality. They are not pure religious documents. 
Then came hundreds of acharyas and gurus expounding the principles of spiritual concepts and interpretations. Aryabhatta, Varahamihira, BrahmaGupta concentrated on calculations and Astronomy. Many treatises were written In sanskrit and tamil. Sangam literature like Purananuru, thirukkural , etc also expound spiritual thoughts. 
Sankaracharya gave extensive analysis and interpretations on upanishads, Brahmasutra,  Bhagavad Gita.  He had written many treatises on spirituality - the eternal quest, jnana , qualities of gurus and shishyas in viveka Chudamani,  tattva bhodha,  atma bodha, upadesa sahasri. 
We know about Sankaracharya,  Ramanujacharya, Madhvacharya, followed by many disciples like sureshwara, and later Abhinava gupta . We had several scholars like Gargesa working on Navya nyaya, Bhaskara and Madhava on mathematics . Vidyaranya in 14 th century wrote panchadasi . His brother Sayana wrote interpretations for Rigveda. Many scholars like Allasani Beddanna in Krishnadevaraya's Court had also written on the essence of spiritual thinking.
Puranas like Shiva purana, bhagavatam,  Garuda purana , and many more 
But the greatest literary source for spirituality is mahabharata.  It contains a huge ocean of knowledge on spirituality. Vidhura, Krishna, yudhishtra, Bhishma discuss dharma , wisdom and various other topics. Bhagavad Gita gives a simple set of rules for spiritualism. 
Hitopadesha , Nitisatakam also discuss humanism and idealism. 
If we look at the19th and  20th centuries  , we don't see a vacuum, but we come across many stalwarts- like Ramakrishna, vivekananda, and hundreds of scholars in Ramakrishna mutt, Swami Sivananda ,  Aurobindo, Appayya dikshitar , Nilakanta dikshitar , and others . There are many nayanmars and poets like Kalidasa , Bhartrhari,  Bhana, Thirumoolar,  Kambar, Sekkizhar who have propagated these ideas and stories. 
Most exposition are available in a print form now . That is our luck. There are hundreds of writings based on these source materials. So we needn't worry about sources. 
The next question - how did spiritual living disappear ? Let me see it in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
06/05/25, 3:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.   705
Before we discuss the reduction in the emphasis and practices of spirituality in India in the past century, let us see how we became spiritually strong.  Religion was considered an  essential requirement in one's life. The term we use is sanatana dharma . It is beyond religion.  our dharma allowed us a lot of freedom in performing worship and conducting rituals. Smritis gave a basic framework for religious activities. Upanishads discussed spiritual aspects. 
We used a term called Matha . It doesn't refer to religion but it meant a particular  sampradaya for a religious practice. These sampradayas were different in different parts of the country. Sankaracharya provided a framework to unify the sampradayas. 
 Temples, prayers, and chanting were the common practices . The Tamils have a saying,” don't live in a place where there is no temple”. The country had ,as seen in the last post,  lakhs of religious teachers and scholars. Unlike christianity , we are permitted to pray or worship or do puja without any priest. That is how it was  practiced  in most homes. Special and temple pujas and yagnas were conducted by priests. The entire country had built a strong religious infrastructure like temples, mutts, pilgrimages, festivals - family, society and temple-,  samskaras, etc. These kept religious practices vibrant and alive.

People build habits and beliefs  based on what is happening around them .  Their activities also depended on the local conditions . The family and societal environments and the  kings nurtured their habits and beliefs ,and  strengthened them. 
Kings supported both gurukulas and also religious activities. Most kings obeyed many religious and spiritual activities. We have enough evidences of vijayanagar empire, Maratha empire, cholas , pallavas and pandyas  playing a major role in promoting religion and scholarships.Even in our recent memory ,we saw Raja Sarfoji patronising spirituality , he set up the Saraswati mahal library and had hundreds of scholars working there. Similarly, the Mysore Wodeyar maharajas patronised such traditional scholarship . Jayachamarajendra wodeyar was a great scholar and supported the oriental library . He collected many scholars in Mysore. Kautilya's  arthashastra was discovered in Mysore by Shama sastry . The Travancore Maharajas also supported music, arts , and scholarships over centuries. 
The west never had this kind of support system. It had a strong religious hierarchy of churches with central authority. But it lacked a popular and decentralised spiritual infrastructure and scholarship that was existing in India. It was the extensive network of gurukula systems- close to 70000 according to one count-, prevailing across the thousands of towns and villages and the availability of major centres of scholarship that helped spirituality to live and thrive in India. Spiritual discussions and propagation of knowledge was a major profession of scholars in those days. 
Because of the king's support and the flourishing gurukula system, people followed many values of a spiritual life in addition to leading a normal material life, thereby keeping a bonding and balance between the two and using the values in their worldly actions. 

But how did that holistic system disappear? 
Unfortunately, the British destroyed that kind of life by destroying the root - the gurukulas and introducing a western totally materialistic education system. They banished Hindu religion and spiritual studies from our education System. That is followed even now. Both western scholars and Indian scholars collaborated to banish spiritual learning from schools and universities. Our historians also helped in this. They couldn't understand the difference between religion and spirituality. All these successfully created a set of  strong views that
“Religion is bad,
 religion propagates superstitions, 
religion is unscientific, 
religion is personal, 
Religion has no place in our education system.
 Banish religion and spirituality.”
 That was the death knell for spiritual living. So spirituality started dying in the 20th century. People  looked down on religion and spirituality. They stopped reading upanishads , stopped following a value system . People aped the west and became materialistic and abandoned religion. A new religion was established by Nehru and strengthened by Indira Gandhi in the constitution - secularism. It gave everyone a licence to attack our religious beliefs and symbols. 
Unfortunately while Gandhi talked about spiritual education, Nehru was opposed to it. He didn't like religion. So he effectively destroyed it by creating a public ridicule of dharma . We are seeing the cumulative  effects of Macauley and Nehru now.
Our education system is partial with a strong affinity to science and a distorted history . We also believed in communism strongly. 
Fortunately  these Nehruvian  concepts were not understood by most people. So our religious activities continued. But our scholarship activities on spirituality died. 
More in the next Post.
Greetings
Dks
07/05/25, 3:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 706
“As to methods, there may be a million and then some, but principles are few. The man who grasps principles can successfully select his own methods. The man who tries methods, ignoring principles, is sure to have trouble.”
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON

We need to understand why religions came up in all major civilizations?
This is important to understand the role religion played in our life. True dogmas destroyed the purity of religions. It is not the mistake of religion , but the followers' dogmatism and fearful beliefs. 
Religion came with civilization. Philosophy came next. Philosophy concentrated on the unknowns and principles , not methods.  Science evolved later. It concentrated on the knowns and methods.  Curious minds played an important part in both. 
While science looked at matter and known phenomena - that what are seen and observable- and could not explain many natural cosmic phenomena - like what is not seen, observed or measured-  like rotation of planets around the sun , religions came to fill in that void with their hypothesis about mysterious aspects like space, nature, cosmos, planets , mind ,  consciousness etc. From religions , philosophy emerged. Religions have  two segments - daily religious and ethical practices and the spiritual scholarship in pursuit of knowledge of the unknown. 
Science in the west didn't look at space till the 15th century. The mathematics of the west with Roman numerals was primitive. But India was far ahead. It could measure the movements of planets and sun's positions , predict eclipses and perform detailed calculations in the BCE era itself. That was part of our understanding of the  unknowns  and all this knowledge was  considered part of spirituality. 
Our greatest theory ,which is getting attention today not only in India but in other parts also and by other practitioners also , is the concept of Brahman- an ununderstandable , permanent,  all pervasive, without qualities , highly intelligent, highly aware , phenomenon - satchitananda. That is fundamental to hinduism 
Our spirituality emphasized on jnana. It felt strongly that 
Purpose of life is to achieve liberation through a search for the eternal. 
It is possible through proper training of our mind and through good ethical practices to purify ourselves.
Scholarship is an essential requirement for living and doing actions. 
Jnana increases our awareness, cognition and our consciousness.
Learning is through concentration, contemplation,  self introspection and self realization. A free and open mind is needed for this. 
 Jnana was the second step of spirituality , the first step being the selfless,  ethical , orderly and frugal living .


Let me look at a higher definition of spirituality. 
Brahman, the creative intelligence flows through the universe which holds the key to living to your potential. You can feel it pulsating in every part of your being. Like the Sun, it constantly emits energy, and you can light up yourself and the world around you when you are plugged in and switched on. You are charged with spiritual energy which needs only to be released for you to create the kind of life you want to lead. 
‘Spiritual’ means ‘non-physical’. Our ideas, intelligence, imagination, sense of humour, kindness, creativity and so on – all the qualities that make us who we are – are non-physical. We seek happiness, love, friendship and peace, and all of these are non-physical too. 
Our spirituality creates our world, because our lives are simply a reflection of whatever we hold in our minds. ‘Spirituality’ also relates to the meaning of life in all its splendour. Have you ever wondered who you are, why you’re here and where it leads? The only thing we know for sure is that we were born and one day we’re going to die. But do our lives matter? How do we fit into the overall scheme of things? Many philosophers have offered their views down the ages, each shedding a little light on the subject. 
Practical spirituality is about self-knowledge, self-empowerment and searching for peace and contentment in a seemingly imperfect world.
We should  distinguish between two crucial terms: religion and spirituality. The word religion has many meanings; in particular it implies a concern with the sacred and supreme values of life. The term spirituality, on the other hand, refers to direct experience of the sacred. Spiritual practices are those that help us experience the sacred—that which is most central and essential to our lives—for ourselves. That is the highest conscious level of spirituality. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
08/05/25, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  707 
Why do we need spirituality?
This is important. This is the point Mr Sambamurthy raised. Most will have doubts - we are doing fine , but why do we talk about spirituality? We have discarded religion.  Why do we need to bring in spirituality? 
Let us look at the country today . What is the state of living in our country  ?
What governs our life now?
The one thing everyone agrees is the growth of corruption. A person gets a good government job, gets a good salary ,but wants more money. He demands money for doing his job. Greed is catching up with many government servants and officers. Even rich officers became corrupt. 
Corruption led to insincerity, poor work culture.  poor quality etc. Even living by the common people is not peaceful. Anxiety and fear pervade everywhere.
Poor people suffered. This led to large-scale dissatisfaction and unhappiness. 
Society became consumption oriented. Aspirations and expectations went up. Every child should go to IIT,  every youngster should aim for a foreign job. Everyone should own and SUV and a big house and all amenities. 
Even rich people felt unhappy. The middle class was upset and stressed , and couldn't spend time with family. Recall Narayana murthy asking people to work for 70 hours per week. Work - Life balance was lost . 
People felt money is the only important thing in life, getting it by hook or crook is normal. So Ethical values disappeared. 
Value system is different from religious practices. 
The situation wasn't good. It has been happening over several decades and it is becoming worse.
What governs our life is greed, consumption, Pollution, stress , unhappiness and no ethical values. 
What should our life be? A simple materialistic , money making life? The answer is no. 
Life has greater purposes .  
Fortunately, the people in the villages  and many from traditional families had some value systems. Awareness of nature, conservation of resources are increasing. Most children are better informed on the environment  than academics and administrators. Most value friendships . Social interactions - whatsapp- have increased among common people. Community living is becoming better particularly in apartment complexes. 
Greed and money making made people move towards easy religious practices - and a larger number of people visit temples and astrologers today than before. Most temples are crowded. It looks like a picnic , not piety . 
 These made some people think about spirituality .

We come across a few questions in life like-
Most parents worry and say - my son / daughter is not interested in his studies . What should be done to motivate him,?
Some say - my son has no attention in his studies ?
Some say - my son is weak in mathematics.  What should be done?
Many say - I am unhappy with my job or my life or health . They even ask why God is troubling me? They even say - God is unfair. 
Many are uncertain about their future. 
Everyone wants to know the impact of AI on jobs, safety and survival. They are worried. 
Many even ask - why should I live ?- I knew a young mathematician in the seventies. He tried to commit suicide. It was detected in time and he was brought back to life. But the second time , he succeeded. He was less than 30 years of age then . Why did he die?
There are many more questions like these and they run to a psychiatrist for help. It is here spirituality helps us to understand life and tells us how to improve it. 
So the question is -  What should govern our
 life ?
For thousands of years , wise men and women from all traditions have sung the praises of the many benefits that flow into the lives of practitioners as they progress along the spiritual path. Gradually, the heart begins to open, fear and anger melt, greed and jealousy dwindle, happiness and joy grow, love flowers, peace replaces agitation, concern for others blossoms, wisdom matures, and both psychological and physical health improve. Virtually all aspects of our lives are touched and transformed in some way. 
Physical benefits are also dramatic. Spiritual practices can reduce stress, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels. They may help alleviate insomnia, muscle spasms, and diseases ranging from migraine to chronic pain. They may even reduce the effects of aging and lengthen the life span. One Harvard study showed that nursing home patients who were in their eighties when they first began meditation felt happier, functioned better, and lived longer than non meditators

Uncertainty leads to unhappiness.  AI will create uncertainties. So the need for spiritualism increases in the coming AI era. 
Let us see how to develop Spirituality in us in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
09/05/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 708


What are the easy steps to spirituality?
Let us look at the first stage - physical and ethical stage .  
The first step is to define a set of values for yourself and a determination to follow them and act according to them.
These steps everyone can accept and follow. I list a few below.
Reduce desires and wants. Balance your aspirations to your capabilities and opportunities. Don't dream of moon in the beginning itself. See people of your kind , see how they live, learn from the satisfied people and also learn what not to do from the unhappy people. Become a realist. Greed minimization is an essential requirement. Remember there sayings in Isa Upanishad - “ everything in the universe belongs to God . Use them sparingly and frugally.” Gandhi rephrased this as “ Nature can meet our needs ,but not our greeds.”  Wants are there in our life . But choices are there - should I buy a 5000 rupees  shirt or 500 rupees shirt ? Should I keep 10 shirts or 100 shirts? How long should I keep a dress - one year , five years, ten years ? There are more important questions that come up - should I go for a local holiday or foreign holiday , a cheaper holiday or an expensive one?  So before an action to buy , avoid impulses, appearances , weigh the pros and cons , check on affordability , consider environmental factors and then decide. This will run contrary to our government's urge to increase consumption. Reduce , reuse, recycle should be our mantra, 
Be compassionate, empathetic and helpful. Remember Kennadys famous statement - ask not what the country can do for me , but ask what i can do for the country - society, neighbours, needy . This is the Rig vedic dictum - give and share. Recall Kanchi mahaswami's one handful of  rice scheme to feed the poor. A simple and affordable scheme.  Many drops become a flood.  This connects you to your society , brings in an attitude of participation and makes you happy. 
Create an environmental awareness and consciousness. This is important for our survival today. We have thrown sustainable living to the wind. Respect nature. Understand that our survival depends on the survival of nature. Nature sustains us. We moved away from reuse and recycle  mantra to use and throw philosophy. We are creating huge wastes due to this use and throw actions  and are also putting a burden on nature. Pollution of air, water, soil are our creations. 
Tolerance. We are short on this - community tolerance, habits tolerance, economic, caste and religious tolerances. We criticise others' appearances, status, performance and actions. We compare ourselves with others . We hate other castes , communities - Tamils call vadakkans now referring to north Indians and call many communities settled for thousands of years as immigrants , a despicable practice. The same Tamils proudly quote the poem “ all are our towns and all are our relatives “. They don't seem to follow what they preach. 
We also have another dictum here - “vasudhaiva kutumbakam”. Divisiveness and intolerance are not to be propagated as a section of  Tamils are doing for several decades.  Let us be human , treat all - humans , animals and plants and nature with dignity . Let us follow the sayings ,” Lokas samastha sukhino bhavanthu “. Tolerance implies “ not sticking to a set of rigid views ,but listening and analyzing other views also. Have an open, flexible mind”. Another factor leading to intolerance is our fixed set of beliefs. 

How do we implement a value system for people?
It needs a top down approach. 
It starts with governments. A big transformation in government priorities and actions are needed . We need a masive program for restructuring government goals. Forget the obsession with growth , GDP and consumption. Look at development and happiness.  Encourage them through awards , departmental rethink and rework,changes in  education  and awareness campaigns . Governments are anti nature. The lip service should go. Will these happen? If government doesn’t get into this, there is no way people will move in this direction. Remember the statement, “yatha raja thatha Praja- people follow rulers. “
Maybe,  RSS should put pressure on the government to spend 50% on ethical and human values development . It is a great investment. What do we get by becoming the fourth richest nation ? We need to have influencers to focus on ethics . Youtube is a good medium to push these ideas. 
If the government doesn't change its visible priorities , then we will get marginal success only. 
The next big thing is the emphasis on values, habits and beliefs in the ten years of schooling. We threw values with religion out and banished them from school education.  
We need to focus at least 70% of time on ethical , human and social education and rest on science and mathematics.  History should be people’s history , not kings and wars. This needs a major change in mindset, not an easy task . 
There are a few hundred schools implementing an ethical values based education system . That is not enough. 
One solution is to use AI and reach all people and children. Massive awareness activities and education helped in sensitising children to environment.  
Industries should implement a strong and implementable ethical policy. Focus should be on welfare and balancing of lifestyles , not on 70 hours work culture. 
More in next.
Greetings 
Dks
10/05/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 709

The second stage in the development of spirituality is the improvement of mind. This stage concentrates on knowledge and proper application of knowledge in our life. 
It helps us to define the purpose of our life and living. 
What is a normal  purpose of life?
I will say ,” live for others” - service orientation . We have many examples for this saying ,” paropakarartham  idam sariram”. Some examples are - farmers, teachers, house wives, doctors, cooks,  all services people, house construction people, industry workers, counsellors, priests, merchants, soldiers, etc - almost covering a very large percentage of the adult population in the world. 
Let us look at different stages of life/ people according to another classification. 

Stage One people have little or no interest in spirituality. They appear to have few moral principles, live chaotic lives and are frequently found in prisons or on the street. Some, however, rise to positions of power, including some politicians, business leaders, etc.
Stage Two people look to authority and are dependent on an organisation for their governance. This could be the military, a business organisation, public institution or religious body. The majority of traditional religious believers fall into this category. They rely on its teachings and rituals for stability and to deliver them from uncertainty.
Sooner or later some Stage Two people (often the young) question the need for an organisation with rigid structures, rituals and superstitions and begin to move to Stage Three.
Stage Three - agnostics / public service-  These people dislike authority and feel no need to look to an organisation for direction. Some are agnostics or atheists; some are drawn to other philosophies. They are truth seekers and usually ahead of Stage Two in their spirituality without being religious in the usual sense of the word. They are often involved in causes working for peace and justice.
Stage Four  individuals believe in the underlying connectedness between things. They are comfortable with the mystery of life and seek to explore it more deeply. They are inspired by the great religions, but not bound to them. At first sight, Stage Two and Stage Four people appear opposites, yet they have much in common. They know the same passages of scripture but interpret them differently. Stage Three people are baffl ed by Stage Four. On the one hand, they aspire to their awareness and spirituality while being puzzled about their interest in those old myths and legends.
Stage four  may have subgroups.
We divided transformation to stage 4 into three sequences of spiritual upgrades - first is to improve the mental functions, second is to improve the knowledge capabilities and third is to increase consciousness levels. 


We saw most of us are doing a service. To perform this important task of service, we need knowledge and so we need to sharpen our mind.
What is mind? 
Mind was not accepted by the west in the beginning. Even now ,many think the mind is a part of the brain. It is not. Upanishads concentrate mostly on the mind, thinking, questioning, discovering ,  consciousness and ways of sharpening our mind. Understanding the mind and using it is the main task of our life. 

The word "mind" refers to the faculty of an individual that allows them to think, feel, perceive, understand, apply, decide and act. It encompasses all mental processes, including both conscious and unconscious activities. In essence, the mind is the seat of thought, emotion, and consciousness. 
Here's a more detailed look at the concept:
Key aspects of "mind":
Thought and Reasoning: The mind is responsible for thinking, reasoning, and processing information. 
Emotion and Feeling: It's also the source of emotions, feelings, and sensations. This leads to our well being. 
Consciousness: The mind allows us to be aware of ourselves and our surroundings. 
Will and Intent: The mind enables us to make decisions, have intentions, and pursue goals. 
Memory and Recollection: The mind stores and retrieves memories, allowing us to remember past experiences. 
Imagination and Creativity: The mind is the source of imagination, creativity, and the ability to form new ideas. 
Private and Personal: The mind is often considered a private and personal realm, where thoughts and feelings are unique to each individual. But according to Upanishads,  mind is connected to personal  consciousness , and to universal consciousness. 

Next, let us ask how one develops mental Spiritual behaviours in today's  context.
Spiritualism is the governance principle for the mind.
Self awareness: Understand yourself - strengths, weaknesses, desirables,  achievables, purposes and goals, directions, beliefs, behaviours, habits, health issues, etc. Realise that your mind controls your thoughts , emotions and actions. Mental reactions are more effective than chemical reactions due to medicines. 
Start building viveka - viveka plays an important role in discrimination 
Get rid of unhealthy mind- negative thoughts, destructive thoughts, hate, ,jealousy, one up- manship , comparisons, greed , 
Build a peaceful calm mind - this is tough. Be sincere, truthful, Don't get stressed about final outcomes , successes , define your comfort level , reduce consumption. be happy with what you have, hope for the best , 
Build a free, deep thinking  and open mind 
Develop curiosity- contemplate, create both in- out and out - in views, birds eye and worms views , analyse .
Build a positive and  Benevolent mindset - helping , learning, improving 
Build a good society around you. 
Improve consciousness
Aim towards self realizations.

My third  level aims for a higher level as envisaged in our vedanta and upanishads- building and increasing the  levels of consciousness - understanding brahman . 

Greetings
Dks
11/05/25, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 710
“I have striven not to laugh at human actions, not to weep at them, not to hate them, but to understand them.”
—Baruch Spinoza,
morality is the extraordinary human capacity that made civilization possible.
human mind is designed to “do” morality, just as it’s designed to do language, sexuality, music, and many other things.
Jonathan Heidt 
The current time has many challenges for people due to uncertainty , complexity, loss of jobs and fast technological changes. 
Society is changing everywhere now. But societies didn't know the proper directions. People are thinking of constant innovation, agility , adaptation to AI etc. Spiritual ways of improving mind and thinking and viveka and jnana will help in this turbulent time. 
We need to reimagine our total education system. Informal learning should become formal. 
How do we build a spiritual society ?
Mr Sambamurthy asked about getting a spiritual infrastructure to be built in India. We saw what , why of spirituality. We need to see the how . 

Remember how yoga was brought into our thinking through several programs. 
It is not a mechanical streamlined process. 
It needs to evolve. It took a lot of effort. 
There were many private efforts to popularise Yoga . Mysore turned out thousands of yoga teachers. Vivekananda Kendra also produced thousands of yoga experts. It was swami sivananda who started the teaching and popularisation of yoga. Most religious units like sadhguru,  Sri Sri ,  and many others popularised yoga. There are thousands of such units of yoga across the country. These were functioning for more than 50 years. What are the results? 
Many foreigners came , got trained and started training centres in the west. But there was no major impact on India.  
When Modi decided to popularise Yoga, it reached a high level. People followed him and took to yoga. Yoga became known internationally. Its benefits are now known to many. It is now part of our school curriculum. 
So the authorities should show interest in spirituality in order to build a spiritual society. 
Government should spend 50% of its time on spiritual development instead of putting all its eggs in one basket of GDP growth and spending billions of rupees in business subsidies. Government should have a multipronged strategy , plan and implementation for the development of spirituality. There is an Ayush ministry. It should become a ministry of spiritual development.  The Ministry of education should focus on spirituality.
Government should set up hundreds of institutions specializing in spirituality , its applications in health and human resources . 
The primary  approaches of governments are of two types 
Revenue generation - taxes 
Law and order

Law presupposes people are criminals . So instead of punishment based system - some of it is needed to curb major crimes-, create an incentive system for values. We occasionally hear stories about the honesty of a poor person like a house maid or auto driver. Our response is to appreciate the act and then forget about it. Why are we not celebrating them ,rewarding the honest people, rewarding people who help during disasters. We think that the disaster relief team and fire fighting force should face hazardous situations and do their duty. Why ? We want to be safe and put them in danger . We don't appreciate the poura karmikas . They do a tough job daily. I call these as - honesty is punished. So create a value based system, create a monetary reward or salary based on the level of values and not skills. Will we be able to do this? 
Mindset change is the starting point. We think that money can buy anything. We don't thank people who repaired many things in our house on time. 
Also we need a major exercise on content development integrating upanishad concepts , Bhagavad Gita principles, Nitisatakam and hitopadesha stories. This should be in a simple language. We need to produce books focusing on values, ethics, life practices,  mind development , cognition , knowledge, etc. 

Next change is in industries going in for ethical focus. Ignore profit fixation. If you are doing fine, that should be enough. Don't look for increased profits. That is the seed for greed. So it should be stopped. Will they do it? Why do industries think they exist for shareholders , not for the people? 
As a country we think of two approaches - socialist and capitalist. Forget them. Money is needed upto a point. Go for ethics and consciousness awareness. Create a new model. 
That means a lot of rework for economists to build a new balanced model of values based economics away from today's monetary economics. 
Next ,we need a huge mindset changes in education.  I have written about it. 
Everyone should understand that 50% of your life is reserved for others .

Greetings 
Dks
12/05/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 711
We discussed our  minds . Mr Srinivasan aaked me what is the word for mind in sanskrit. We commonly use the term manas. But there are many other terms like chitta, ahamkara, buddhi etc.  I want to discuss one term in relation to mind - consciousness. 
What are the terms for consciousness in sanskrit?

In Sanskrit, there are many terms for  Consciousness  —
1.Chetna चेतना
2 Bodha बोध:
3 Sacheta सचेत:
4 Abhigyata अभिज्ञता
5 Jagriti जागृति:
6 Sachetan सचेतन:
7 Chaitanya चैतन्य:
All  mean awareness. But we are not aware of many hard conscious or shall I say super conscious states in our mind. The term is absolute consciousness, not relative , the word being chit in sanskrit.  If you look at an entity or action or an event or a situation , consciousness means we know about that. We have awareness. But what is awareness wrt an unknown all pervasive brahman ? You can't even imagine anything. So no understanding. It is a realization . So the term conscious doesn’t correctly reflect the Turia state - the highest level. We need a better English term than consciousness to translate the absolute, all pervading , unexplainable state. 
Sometimes we feel the unknown consciousness and its effects. You were struggling with a problem and the solution was  not there in the near horizon. Any amount of breaking your brain was not giving a solution. Tired, you go to sleep. In deep dreamless sleep you get a solution. This has happened to me several times. I am always puzzled about this occurrence.  So you have a super mind working inside ,but you don't know what it is, where it is and how it works. That relates to a higher level - chit level. We get solutions from somewhere - is it inside you or comes from outside? This needs a lot of clarity. 
I think consciousness implies low levels of activities and ignores higher level activities like intuition, spark. 
Any comments on this?
Let me look at the second query by Mr Sambamurthy:
“Technological evolution is outpacing or has  already outpaced emotional and spiritual evolution. What are the negative consequences and how to mitigate them?
Appreciate your comments.
Thank you DKS.”

My response
The world concentrated more than four centuries for technology developments and absorption. Millions of engineers worked on this. Billions of dollars were spent on this. All governments supported , encouraged , funded and adapted new technologies enthusiastically. There is a lot of organised effort, a lot of serious serious research, a lot of synergy and a lot of competition on technology based development.  
Technology diffusions were planned and executed systematically. We see the concerted efforts of millions of engineers, financiers, economists, developers , and politicians. 
People saw many benefits due to technologies like steam engine, electricity, electronics communications, computers, Internet,  IT, connectivity, mobile to AI.
When a technology like nuclear bomb was seen as a disastrous one, governments are controlling its use. We are going slow with caution in genetic engineering. 
There were a few isolated Luddites who tried to halt technological progress . But they didn't succeed. We see many attacking AI today. These are not simple Luddites , but serious researchers. But human ingenuity will find a feasible path for the AI dilemma. 
So all these factors helped technological evolutions faster. 21st century saw an exponential leap in technological developments with great successes. 
I should say we have mastered the art of materialism well and exploit them. 
The causality in this is the human values - empathy, concern,compassion, support, gratitude, humility ,collaboration, altruism etc. We have buried them. Surprisingly , we expect many will write about the problems . In the mid 20th century , many Irish writers wrote about the inhuman conditions in the textiles business. 
We don't see many economists, sociologists, writers and the so called intellectuals worried about the erosion of human values. The leftist minds are materialistic. I don't see a spiritual and sane human identified by the coterie calling themselves intellectuals particularly in India. We decry spiritual people, abuse them, and attribute motives to them. We think spirituality is a huge virus to be eliminated. The effect of this anti spiritual views and fast paced beneficial technology developments have resulted in today's situation of creating a highly mechanical and mechanized world.
I don't see a concerted effort to analyse all aspects - positive and negative - of this disease. I call this disease as humachinisation, a new word coined by me- humans behaving like machines. 
We ignored spirituality . Will this situation of machine orientation give us stability, peace and happiness? Those human qualities are going beyond the reach of many. 
Let us reverse with full force to give primacy to spirituality.
This completes my discussions on this topic . Thanks Mr Sambamurthy. 
Greetings
Dks
13/05/25, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 712

“To say that individuals transcend themselves means that individuals cannot be identified with their position in reality and in the society. 
Transcending oneself means openness to action, to project, to modification of one’s own conditions: it means doing plans for the future and hope in the future. It means that individuals are born free as regards their dimension in the world: they are not identifiable with the conditions they live in. “
Paulo Freire 
Let us return to my learning paths. I was discussing the year  1959 when I joined the college and moved to English medium education. Instead of saying i got adjusted to my college education, I want to say I got integrated into education. That was a great awakening. I had a large number of classmates and teachers who were Christians.  I understood their culture. I started reading a lot of English books during this period and it continues even now. My love for reading and absorbing information is quite high. I enjoy this task. I learnt the art of  abstraction of what I learnt into a few sentences or a page . This practice started at this time due to a strict tuesday afternoon composition activity supervised by the vice principal in the big college auditorium. We were given a story or an article and told to condense it to a paragraph. I loved this task and did it fast. 
I have already discussed my engineering college stay for five years at Madurai. It helped me to get a deeper exposure  in engineering.  I understood specialisation. But very importantly , I was a generalist at heart interested in many areas like literature, politics , economics , spirituality etc. Those interests  continued throughout my life . My mathematics got strengthened. Another revelation was that I had no fear of unknowns. By the time ,I reached the final year of UG engineering, I got interested in electronics, control systems and computers. 
I applied to IISc for ME in applied electronics and control systems and got admissions. But I didn't join that year. I took up a job in Madras. I got disillusioned with industry ambience and decided to apply for IISc again , selected for ME power systems - i applied to power systems this time based on advices from my seniors , including my boss S Balasubramanian . Later i realised it's advantages and disadvantages and rectified them. 
So I landed in Bangalore on July 28th 1965 and I was the first to get admitted on that day - incidentally for that year- my SR number is the first. I got advantages due to that. I finished my admissions procedure in the first floor of the main building by 10 am. I met Mr R Vaidyanathan, the assistant registrar and Mr SS Prabhu , the registrar. Immediately afterwards, I went to the hostel and got a room allotted in H block. I was lucky  because getting rooms in the hostel was not easy. I met Mr Kuppanna, superintendent,  who became a great friend of mine. I deposited my luggage in the room, and went to the EE department office to complete my admission formalities. I met Mr Seshachala, a great person , another friend and then met the head, Prof Ramachandra Rao. 
Classes started only on August 2, as first was a sunday. So I had three days to get acclimatized to the institute and city. I went to Malleswaram circle ,nearly 2 km distant from IISc and opened an account in canara bank there. 
The whole thing looked like a dream for me at that time. 
Let me give my first impressions of bangalore at that time and later my impressions of IISc.
Greetings 
Dks
14/05/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 713
“The charming landscape which I saw this morning, is indubitably made up of some twenty or thirty farms. Miller owns this field, Locke that, and Manning the woodland beyond. But none of them owns the landscape. There is a property in the horizon which no man has but he whose eye can integrate all the parts, that is, the poet. “
Whole is bigger than the sum of the parts. 
R Waldo Emerson.     Nature

My joining IISc was considered by me as a very wise move. I never realised then that it will transform me and keep me chained to it. That was a very lucky thing to happen for me. 
Bangalore looked very different for me in many ways. It was a totally new experience for me. 
I had by then visited several metro cities like Calcutta, Delhi, and lived in Madras. I lived for two weeks in Calcutta,  two weeks in Delhi and one year in Madras.  So I knew what was to be expected  from a big city . The first thing you expect is a great railway station . 
My disappointment with Bangalore started with the railway station. It was smaller than some small cities I had visited or stayed  like Madurai, Jamshedpur , Coimbatore etc. Some others like Kharagpur , Vijayawada were bigger than the  Bangalore station at that time. There were only about six platforms , no frontage building as it exists now.  Entrances were not noticeable,  small wicket gates. You went out of the station through a small gate in the fence - just like a village. That was my first shock about bangalore. The present front building came up only in the seventies. But Bangalore had all three gauges- broad gauge to Madras , meter gauge to Mysore , Hubli (Poona), and Guntakal and narrow gauge to near Nandi hills. So the focus was the meter gauge where many trains were going in different directions. The broad gauge was connected to Madras via Jolarpet. Two trains to Madras and one to Cochin were the only trains on that route. We can't go to Bombay , Calcutta or Delhi directly . We need to change at either Pune or Guntakal or Madras. Reaching Mangalore was only by a long, roundabout route via solar pet, Salem, shoranur  taking a day. All the improvements and direct  connections happened only in the post eighties period. Bangalore was not a priority for the southern railway. 
This meant a lot of inconveniences for me. I needed to take three trains to reach home , and two trains for other big cities. Ticket booking and reservations was a nightmare then. 
But once I came out of the station , the situation and my impressions changed completely. The weather was pleasant and cool. People were polite. People understood many languages. I asked an auto to take me to IISc and he asked , ‘is it Tata institute?’
I didn't get it ,but guessed that the locals called it Tata institute to show their gratitude to JN Tata . They pronounced Tata as Thatha- grandfather, appropriate as JN was the man who built a science capital here. 
The auto went through almost straight north. There was very little traffic . When we entered Malleswaram,  I saw broad roads, a huge Malleswaram circle , and two huge circles at IISc.  I saw lots of trees everywhere. The driver after taking a turn at IISc main circle entered into a road going inside . There was no gate, no IISc signboard then. I asked the driver and he affirmed that it is the Tata institute.  After some distance, I saw the tower of the main building. I got down and went to the main building for completing admissions. Most people - office staff and even class 4 employees were very polite and helpful. They understood Tamil, Telugu , Hindi , in addition to Kannada. Later I found we had a mixed population of employees from Tamilnadu,  coastal Andhra, kerala and karnataka. So getting along and knowing places were easy. As I didn't know Kannada then, I managed with Tamil and English and Hindi also outside in the city. 
Let me return to the description of  Bangalore city scenario later and concentrate on IISc in 1965 ,particularly my first few days. It was a great place. It looks big , almost formidable, but it was a very friendly place with a great ambience for learning. I used to tell my friends and acquaintances that IISc is designed for walking - a lot of open spaces, hundreds of trees , spaced out buildings and nice weather congenial for walks. I found out we get most things inside - there was a cooperative stores inside providing groceries , stationary items and toiletry. 
Let me discuss my first day in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
15/05/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 714
“ we have a spiritual intelligence that is our potential guide to the real meaning of the human experience, why we are here, and what we are here to do. It is a pure light of intelligence that illuminates the way and nourishes all those who long to live their lives meaningfully. Our spiritual intelligence is the very foundation of self leadership. After all, how intelligent is it to be outwardly successful when we obscure this powerful core of intelligence and are often stressed or depressed? How can we lead others from stress and depression when they are struggling to find their own meaning?”
Richard Bowell

My first day was very smooth. As I said earlier , I got my admissions done by 9: 30 am, joined the hostel , met the HoD of the EE department- all done by about 11 o'clock. I also signed my scholarship application and handed it over to the office after I got my bank account. I visited the library and applied for library cards. 
The entire admissions process was an offline system . So how did all these separate units like the department office, hostel, library etc knew me as a new student? It was a simple trick. At the time of admissions ,all activities like checking admissions letter, my certificates, paying the fees , meeting the assistant registrar, deans etc,pertaining to admissions were done in the same place . So after paying the fees, I was given six copies of the receipt . Registrar signed them when I met him after completing the admissions procedure.  I should submit it in the hostel, department, library, health centre and gymkhana as proof of my studentship. I got no id card then , only my SR number   . So I finished these formalities. It was a clockwork completed by morning. I didn't go to the health centre and gymkhana by then. 
Let me look at the hostel situation then , not a good one. We had four old blocks - A B C D - with 20 rooms each and four new blocks - E F G H- . Most  rooms were double rooms and a few had three occupants.  I was given H4 . H block was the northern end at that time . It was a large open area after H block . 
I went to the A mess by 12: 30 pm for lunch. It was at the other end of the hostel block near the start of the F block.  We had only two messes then - A mess and NV mess. The IISc mess was very famous. It had mostly Malayali cooks and assistants . The supervisors were kannada  persons. Food was very good, very sumptuous and wholesome. It had both chapati and rice . It was hot. The mess had a seating arrangement of about 200 persons, I think. Again , it worked at a high speed. The organization in IISc impressed me. 
Later I realised there were flexibilities in the mess system. I can take guests for a meal . I can write off from the mess for a minimum of two days. The kitchen used firewood then. Later, I changed all these and modernized the kitchen . 
The mess gave us a good breakfast with variety. The one aspect that remained throughout is the Sunday breakfast - Masala Dosa, it never changed and the dosas were hot and good. Recall the effort required to serve hundreds of people fast within minutes . It is not easy , but it was happening in our mess. 
We got one  fruit every night. Saturday and Sunday nights were self service . Sunday lunch was special. We got ice cream. There was one ice cream factory in Whitefield and it will supply ice cream to us. 
In the evening I went to gymkhana . It was located in G block. It had a reading room with newspapers and magazines . It had a library named after Ranade. It had a lot of books in English, Hindi, kannada,  Tamil and Telugu - mostly fiction. So i started to read a fiction book every day . My reading intensity increased. 
I was thrilled with the many facilities in the campus and I had yet to see many other facilities . I was happy with IISc from day one. 
A few learnings on the first day.
1.people come from many parts of India. One hears many languages.
2.Most are multilingual. Most are helpful. 
3.organization is excellent and service oriented. I didn't see this level of support even in private institutions.  
4.System is built with flexibility and
5. The whole campus and ambience were great for learning . This without visiting the library and labs and without meeting any faculty member. 
So it attracted me and I was happy to be here at IISc. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
16/05/25, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 715
“Spiritual intelligence is not just about “what” we learn or “how” we behave, it is about “why” we do what we do. Unless we are developing our level of self, we are missing the most precious resource of all—our engagement in living. Happiness, success, creativity, spontaneity, natural confidence, leadership—these are not things we can learn, not are they techniques or quick fixes that can be adopted. They are fundamental ways of engaging in a field of intelligence that is unlimited—spiritual intelligence.”
Bowell

Let me continue with my first few days experiences in IISc and also Bangalore. I visited the library . It was really an amazing experience seeing the large number of journals and back volumes and the great stack of books. The well lit ,study friendly ambience drew my attention. Library assistants were humble and very helpful persons. There was one person - it is a shame I forgot his name- who never used to sit , and went on arranging books and getting books any reader wanted. His energy and memory were amazing. He was really an unsung hero of the library in the sixties. 
I liked and used the textbook reservation and use facility that was in practice. All text books identified by instructors were kept separately with a reservation card for each book. One can reserve a book for one hour in advance , pick it up and read it during that hour. This helped the students a lot - books were available to all, not monopolised by a few . It was a great service. Library was open till 10pm. Many faculty from central college used to come in the evening and read books and journals. 
We had a big activity on Friday evenings. All recently arrived journals were displayed every Friday. Researchers and faculty used to wait and browse the journals for papers of their interest. That was the only way to know what was happening in other institutions in the world and keeping oneself up to date. 
Later when I was in the second year , I found out there is another effective networking approach to know what is happening . We used to write to researchers and request for their publications. Many helped us. While many used preprinted cards, I used airmail inland letters. I used this to keep in touch with hundreds of researchers in the west. 
So it became evident that the library was the main source of research in IISc. 
Let me give a description of IISc in the sixties. It was a natural working  place in a forest - like an Ashram mentioned in our early literature ,the only missing beings were the wild animals and water bodies. 
As you enter we see two long parallel roads ,one running to the other end . These roads and side roads were lined with a large number of trees. Most buildings on the main road had departments ,and  bungalows , built with a large offset and good garden space. These roads gave a great atmosphere for the institute- a silent, cool and calm atmosphere. We had open spaces everywhere. 
The main building was built after a huge vacant area from the main entrance - about 500 meters and behind the main building - or actually in front of it, because the back of main building faces the road - there is a huge maidan with some huge 100 year old trees patterned like the union jack flag of England . We can walk through the maidan through the straight path and some diagonal paths . 
Departments were located on both sides of the main building.  These are mostly  science departments. Engineering departments were beyond the science departments. My department was close to the end - boundary of the institute. Both electrical and mechanical engineering departments were located in a huge building known as Power engineering building - later I used to call the PE building Thacker's Taj mahal , so you know the size of this big building . That was the biggest building in the institute built by MS Thacker when he was the head of a short lived power engineering department.  He later became director of the institute.  The power engineering department was divided into four  separate departments - civil, mechanical , electrical and high voltage. Walking from the hostel to my department took about 6 to 8 minutes. 
At the other end of the main road after the residential bungalows is the ECE department. 
The institute had a large area of more than 560 acres donated by the maharaja of Mysore,  Nalvadi Krishnaraja wodeyar. Several public roads cut across the institute by creating four separate segments. Some parts of our land had been usurped illegally by people putting up houses and by Ramiah institute. Institute lost the case against Ramiah institute, I was told. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
17/05/25, 4:16 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 716 
“Reality is a rich tapestry of interwoven levels, reaching from matter to body to mind to soul to spirit.”
 Ken Wilber
While buildings are important, I learnt one assessment metric - ambience, the heart of an institution. 
What is ambience? 
It is a combination of the type of people in a place, their motivation, behaviour , work culture, their focus, and the fearless, transparent, harmonious and helpful atmosphere they develop . It also includes governance models, relevance , a futuristic outlook , an outward look and understanding and adjustments to change. The infrastructure, labs etc are secondary.
Unfortunately , this aspect is not understood by most and ignored by all. 
 Most institutions in India are ranked by mostly external factors or outputs like admissions, pass percentage, publications, infrastructure like the number of computers. The assessors  can't measure the intrinsic and intangible but important aspects of ambience. 
What they see is what they assess. What they can't see, they ignore. So They ignore them. I discussed this aspect with my good friend Arvind from TCS who is passionate about quality and was involved in Tata quality assessments. 
Till now, when several hundreds of people asked me and ask me ,’what is special about IISc’, i respond with one cryptic answer  - ambience - excellent , freedom to work, independence etc. 
I have till this point in time observed four institutions - my schools and colleges. The best part of my feelings about these four institutions can be summarised as follows.
These institutions have traditional, limited and localised thinking , doing a routine job in a sincere manner .
The ambience is not negative - it varies from neutral to slightly positive. 
There is a lot of scope to improve their governance - increase the transparency, freedom, participation, futuristic Outlook, looking out to know how the world is changing its functions, and academic commitment.

That is the reason why these institutions didn't grow out of their local , traditional model to become known in the country. They don't have a change management practice . 
Most institutions in India have a poor ambience and live in the 20th century. I want to know 
When will they move to the 21st century models and practices ?
When will they break unwanted traditional practices ?
When will they build a dynamic change management structure?
When will they improve governance?

It is the ambience of IISc that made me love the institution from day one. It puts a newcomer at ease - that is a great achievement in the colonial minded , non helpful India.  
To be honest, if I look back at several hundred institutions , banks, industries and organizations, the sore thumb is 
the unhelpful and sometimes hostile and sometimes corrupt attitude found in all these organizations.
Can we go to a branch of a bank and transact business easily. You are always treated as a newcomer , not a long time customer. Service depends on your encounter with the person. I had a lot of disappointments. 
But there are many good and sincere people helping you out. Because of them , the organization runs. Mr RP Krishnamurthy, undersecretary to the chief minister ,was a classic and shining example . He was simple, sincere, hardworking and helpful. I can give many such examples. But generally , unhelpful attitude prevails. 
Let me illustrate two great services I encountered at IISc on the first day - admissions process, hostel room allotment. 
Every year the institute admits about one third of its students strength and this is conducted for just three days. So a well oiled process and operational system has been developed and tested over decades and it is still running.  The students go through about ten persons each one doing one task - a human parallel processing system . At the end he gets the admissions letter which will be signed by the assistant registrar.  Then the students meet the deans. That is it. There is a limited wait time and it goes on fast. This system continued for more than 50 years .
The hostel allocation is more complicated. Students have choices staying with a roommate from his state or with friends. Many students don't vacate the rooms after completing the course. Some might not have completed their project work by July. There were not enough rooms to accommodate the students. I had seen the hostel staff working hard to allot rooms. It wasn't easy.
But all worked hard and were excited about their job. Many felt they were doing God ‘s job. That is the commitment of our people. 
But later I realised our admin didn't live up to this level. They put impediments in our work. 
Greetings
Dks
18/05/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 717


I want to clarify my understanding of ambience to avoid confusion. I consider ambience is an important concept to be understood. 
It is not just  infrastructure. It is a human ecosystem. It is a dynamic , adaptable and accepted set of human behaviours - like transparency, freedom, independence, helpful attitude, understanding changes  and management, futuristic and outward outlooks , sincerity, seriousness etc. It is a human dependent phenomenon . There is no concept of a physical ambience ,only infrastructure.  But a pristine , calm and soothing nature  ambience helps further in enhancing the mental ambience. The pristine, calm and cool nature at IISc attracts everyone. Then  I found the academic ambience at IISc to be great .  This is a major lesson I learnt. It is not a one day revelation . It is not a miracle.
This understanding of mental ambience and its relationships to success governed my life from early days. This may look like a surprise or even unacceptable statement from me. So let me explain in detail , while deviating from my description of IISc life in the mid sixties. 

We always assume that success depends on hard work, involvement, concentration and collaboration. Definitely yes. I added ambience. But we miss other ingredients . I added some more to that list , the most important one being contemplation , thinking about what happened now, why , what are its impacts. I did this contemplation at the occurrence of every new or unforeseen event that happened to me everyday in my life and made me either happy or sad. I learnt a lot from this activity. I applied it to even the lectures I heard from many leaders or even classroom lectures. This detailed contemplation allowed a few habits to be built - it was self feedback and analysis , it made me abstract facts and remember them for a  long time , it motivated me to learn from everything , it made me look ahead and removed the fear of new changes.
 I have seen many people with such contemplation like Prof. Dhawan, Mr JRD Tata,  Mr Jayakumar Anagol, Mr N. Chandrasekaran, Prof CNR Rao, Prof NS Ramaswamy , and many more. They had clarity of mind, quick grasping power ,an  open and questioning  mind  and futuristic outlook. They observed and understood and acted,  all quickly. 
But to me the best example was Homi Bhabha. He was not just a visionary who could foresee the future of nuclear science for the next hundred years plus, and not only a detailed planner preparing a complete blueprint of the department of atomic energy with the great innovative step of setting up an independent,  non bureaucratic institution in Bombay away from Delhi and most importantly executing meticulously his plan. He understood the gaps in India and decided to set up a school in BARC to produce nuclear scientists, set up a very high quality research establishment ,TIFR and conducting intense yearly summer schools at IISc with great nuclear science , mathematics and computer science experts in the mid sixties, when some fields were just emerging as seeds. We should emulate his vision and work culture. I met him in December 1965  and he died in January 66.  Vikram Sarabhai whom I had met many times in TIFR west canteen emulated many characteristics of Bhabha to build the space activity. But he didn't concentrate and focus on building a holistic vision and plan for Space. It was left to Dhawan , who followed Bhabha’s concepts in a practical way. 
There are many- thousands of people-  who held high positions as heads of a country, directors of institutions who failed to understand their organization and outside world and failed miserably. 
I knew and met  hundreds of directors of IISc, IIMs, IITs, NITs, CSIR labs,DRDO labs and Vice chancellors.  Most don't know what their job is - they do day to day routine administration,  no vision, no direction, no innovative thinking, no futuristic thinking and planning. They think of their position, status, ego  and respect . They are sincere ,no doubt and hardworking.  But the institutions languish. Very few - a handful - are futuristic and plan their institution for the next ten years. Senior persons - scientists ,educationists, academics etc- don't support them. Even Dhawan faced a strong opposition. He could carry forward reforms with some difficulty but with support from middle level faculty. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
19/05/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 718
“Human relationships with the world are plural in nature. Whether facing widely different challenges of the environment or the same 
challenge, men are not limited to a single reaction pattern. They organize 
themselves, choose the best response, test themselves, act, and change in 
the very act of responding. They do all this consciously, as one uses a tool to deal with a problem. 
Men relate to their world in a critical way. They apprehend the objective data of their reality (as well as the ties that link one datum to another) through reflection-not by reflex, as do animals. And in the act of critical 
perception, men discover their own temporality. Transcending a single 
dimension, they reach back to yesterday, recognize today, and come upon 
tomorrow.”
Paulo Freire 

We used to be told when we were young and at school going age that we should play with good children and not join evil ones, we shouldn't even talk to the evil ones . That shows that a good ambience is a networking of good people and a good vibe will flow . We get benefited with that association. That helps in developing goodness in us and we ,when we understand and appreciate these, become spiritual and achieve many things in life. 
This kind of learning is free and is not taught in schools. This is the reason that religions bring in congregations together in churches, mosques and temples. That helps in good vibes flowing . But be cautious that hatred and bad vibes shouldn't flow from there. Be careful to choose your networks. 
What is required to know and take advantage of a human society and its ambience? 
Awareness. We need keen powers of observation of humans, their habits, attitudes ,behaviours and their effects. The society creates a huge drama every day in many places and youtube and TV depict them giving us an opportunity to observe and learn. While I admired determined persons and understood that their efforts will deliver good results, I didn't fully accept  the dominant personalities , starting with Churchill to Nehru, to Indira Gandhi to many current leaders .  I felt that dominance implies a fixed mindset and dictatorship. It instills fear.
Combine it with contemplation.  You get better results 
The third factor is a forward looking capacity that can be built through imagination, heuristics and also the current happenings. Here inanimate activities are merged with human behaviours.  
I  observed the political, economic, environmental and technological changes happening in and around me first and in the world later. This meant that we should be prepared for changes and not resist changes. That meant that I should look for changes ,say, ten years ahead. It is not easy. We go wrong on many guesses. But I understood the importance of some changes . I saw the potentials of computers in 1963 and saw the arrival of operating systems before it was known. Similarly, I predicted relational databases, distributed transactions and many others.  
The fourth factor  I learnt was the concept of connectivity - technology alone is not important . Its connection to usage to help society is more important. So my focus on research was more application centric - like design of large power networks with digital load flow applications , optimization of power production with applications in the country, distributed transactions for banking etc. Connectivity is the basis to understand most happenings in our life - not individual entities or acts . Its the cumulative impact of a person's conversations with others or his acts that have after effects and we need to predict that . Connectivity is not taught in schools. Engineering discusses some form of Connectivity, but in a limited way. But medicine looks at Connectivity more seriously- blood flows, nervous systems ,skin ,digestive systems etc, but a lot of work is going on now on emotional Connectivity. 

These are some guiding principles I adopted in my life.
Greetings
Dks
20/05/25, 5:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 719

Let me resume my first days in IISc in the year  1965. My experiences were ,from the beginning,  highly immersive ,educative  and enjoyable.
 I had by this time visited some institutions in India like Annamalai University, Engineering college, Guindy, IIT Madras , and a few colleges in the north ,east and south . Madras university , from where I graduated and attended my convocation, didn't have a proper campus. It functioned in a few buildings in the Marina beach .
Classes began on August 2, Monday for me.  I met my classmates. I saw and understood the diversity. There were seven of us each from a different state. That was a good experience and opportunity to learn and  know the different languages, different cultures, habits and different ways of learning. This taught me tolerance while broadening my understanding.
That was another requirement for a good life that I learnt and practised- adjustments, understanding and tolerance. I see around me many languages spoken  and people from different parts of the country - and good fusion. I liked it as I loved many languages and started picking up both kannada and a bit of Telugu. 
We had two streams in ME in the department. The other stream - control systems - had 12 students. We had a lot of common classes like Mathematics, Electronics ,Instrumentation etc . So we were together for a good amount of time. So the free gaps in time was used to talk and understand each other. I became friendly with all. 
Classes were again very different , intensive and very serious . Almost all faculty were experienced and knowledgeable except one . Electromagnetic field theory , a tough subject, was taught by a research student . It was cryptic and we didn't understand it . His expression was poor. A lot of individual effort was needed to learn the subject. He was trying to disprove Maxwells equations , but couldn't do it and left the institute after a few years. Also , most faculty had in depth knowledge in the subjects they were teaching  .  The most important difference in teaching I found was forcing students to perform some parts of learning . 
The first major adjustment needed was to start running from day one. Institute followed continuous assessments. Many faculty announced surprise quizzes and many gave large assignments and problem sheets. Most students were not exposed to this and had difficulty in picking up speed. They were spending time getting adjusted to the new place, hostel, food, climate etc. So  when they faced the first test , they found themselves not ready and failed in  the test. This made some lose confidence in their studies. But most did cope up by concentrating on their studies. They learnt quickly. The atmosphere and advice from seniors helped many to pick up the pace of using the library regularly and studying the topics. 
But I seem to be different. I was at ease at IISc from the beginning.  I found the lectures interesting and easy to understand. I was regular in my visits to the library in the evenings. But i felt I had more free time . This despite reading a lot of fiction . So I decided to audit some control systems courses taught by Prof MD Srinath. I also decided to attend the German language course run in the evening by Mr Klatt in the foreign languages section.  He was a very friendly person. He took us to his house once and we met Madam Lokasundari Raman there. I built a good rapport with many faculty like Prof Prabhu and Prof Devanathan  as well as the other faculty in foreign languages section. So life was smooth. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
21/05/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 720
“Will you live in a house full of wastes, junk and dirt? Everyone says, no. 
Then why do you accumulate junk in your mind? Use spirituality to clean up your mind. “
Dks 

So I got settled at IISc with my academic work. I didn't find any difficulty. Everything was smooth and happy. The mess bill I got at the end of the month was less than 60 rupees. So my total expenses were only about 100 rupees per month for room rent and food . Financially, I became a well off person. 
Life was very good . I could read a lot of books , classes were nice, made a lot of friendships, understood linguistic differences and cultural differences , and got a lot of exercise.  
During the first week of stay ,- I think it was 5th of August, I met the director. In those days , it was a standard practice for all new graduate and research students to meet the director. He spent about five to ten minutes with me, asked me - why I chose IISc,  and what I want to do and wished me the best time here. It was a surprise that the director invests his time on each student. I didn't have this experience in any other institution. I found him friendly and knowledgeable.  I felt he could be approached in case of need.
The next requirement was a health checkup. I met Mr. Nagaraja Rao, our health centre lab in charge , who conducted the test. I didn't remember meeting Dr TB Subba Rao, the doctor at that time. It was a simple physical checkup then for about 10 minutes. I liked Nagaraja Rao and found out his interests in several things like studying more courses, producing movies etc. The health centre was a small two room set up. It was located in the same place as now , but much smaller. I was told it was a dining place for orthodox persons before the mess integration in 1954.  There were two compounders - tablets were yet to come in - and a doctors room and a place for lab and dressing . Ramu was an efficient dressing expert. He did a good job. That was the simple and bare  health centre with no facilities. 
Institute closed admissions by August 16 and there was a director's tea on that evening for fresh students . Normally it used to rain on that day. Many schedules were continued by the institute for several decades. That was a wonderful tradition. Many schedules like opening date ,vacation times, exam dates are maintained even now. 
For close to a century , the institute remained a pristine , natural area with lots of greenery. Unfortunately that has changed now with too many buildings without proper spacing giving a crowded urban space . Still most trees were in place , and lots more were planted  during the tenures of Prof Dhawan  and Prof CNR Rao . 
I got settled by then and got busy with work. I found all tests and semester end exams easy and got the first rank in the first semester itself and continued it afterwards. I will discuss how I developed my views on teaching later. 
During the two years of ME , joining IISc after ME didn't occur to me. I saw many getting jobs in Tata electric and was thinking of joining Tata electric company. Even after ME ,I didn't think that I would be in IISc for long. It was destiny and my good fortune that kept me in IISc and allowed me to grow and use my potential to learn and do research and assist others. 
One directional change was directed by my project work that got me interested and involved in research and my flair for teaching.   
In the second semester we had to select a project guide. I went to Prof Ramachandra Rao for advice. He suggested that I should meet N Dharma Rao , who would give me a good topic. So I went to meet Dharma Rao. He had worked on nonlinear stability and suggested a stability problem . I worked throughout the summer vacation and completed the work. Then he suggested load flows. He didn't have any idea on the topic. It was a green field. That excited me. 
I was interested in computers and I had a good foundation in mathematics.  So this problem will lead me to use computers, program the load flow problem and solve it. It was exciting. No one was doing programming work at that time. So I started on a journey that got me ME and PhD and introduced me to computers, programming , computational methods , optimization and solving large problems. That opened a big door. Opportunities dragged me. I couldn't resist it despite advice from many. More on these later
Greetings 
Dks
22/05/25, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 721


“Why be elated by material profit?” Father replied. “The one who pursues a goal of evenmindedness is neither jubilant with gain nor depressed by loss. He knows that man arrives penniless in this world, and departs without a single rupee.”
Autobiography of a yogi
Paramahansa yogananda

Mr Nagaraj has a query:
“Good morning sir. Your Today's message in quotes (starting para) is easy to understand but difficult to practice. Hence unhappiness is inevitable. Is it not so?”

My response
It is a good query. 
I didn't talk about happiness here. It is a higher state. I talked about slavery here. 
I talked about some things that we can change , not about difficult things. 
I do not believe that  unhappiness is inevitable. I think it is a state of emotions. But we will discuss it later. I was asking a question - are we free of slavery? 
Everyone talks that we are slaves of data today and will become slaves of AI tomorrow.  I am not looking at that aspect. I am worried that our mind has a lot of cobwebs.  We need to remove them. That was the purpose of my quote. Our vedanta focuses on that aspect with the highest goal of moksha . 
Let me explain. Humans are built  up of 
Habits - good , bad and unwanted ; 
Beliefs in several  thousands ;
Principles - may be hundreds or more;
Practices - again thousands , these depend upon habits , likes, dislikes, and /or beliefs ;
Emotions 
Ego
Buddhi
We accumulate these and build ourselves over a period of years. 
We get these from parents, relatives, society, school, friends and observations etc in addition to some genetic factors.
Mr Srinivasan ,PNB was talking to me about beliefs. 
Have we become prisoners of our beliefs? 
For example ask ourselves - 
Why this fight between vadakalai and thenkalai? Why the fight between religions, castes , between temple practices , between advaita, dvaita etc? Why do you say one sampradaya is better than others. 
Please live and let others to live, each with their traditions. 
Are we humans with Buddhi or only a large bundle of beliefs?
Do we need all these rigid beliefs to be humans? 
Tamils have a pride for only Tamil language , not for other languages.  Many hate Sanskrit. 
There has been a continuous language fight going on in Bangalore for several decades.
Is India made up of people or Hindus ,Muslims and Christians etc or Tamils, Telugus,  kannadigas , north Indians, Bengalis,  punjabis etc? 
Why do we divide people , create disunity,  create fights , ?
All these, I felt ,  were due to our being rigid and slave to the beliefs we accumulated. We think our beliefs are better and should be followed by others. That creates troubles. 
If beliefs are good , then there is no problem. Some beliefs are good . But not some others. 
The next question is : Are beliefs sacrosanct? Are beliefs unalterable?
At least smart people adjust and learn to live with changes. We as humans are capable of living and adapting to changes. When rice was not available ,we moved to wheat chapati. But  Some don't.  If someone didn't know Kannada,  we still try to help them. Most security and maintenance staff we have don't know Kannada. Can we fight with them? We try to adjust to their behaviour. 
My simple question is 
Why do you judge people. Tell people learn Kannada. If it is done with a good intention, then it is OK,  but it is unfortunately done to show your pride. That is the start for fights. 
Before we start judging others, my request is
Let us judge ourselves, assess ourselves and see how to change us. That i called as the process of dirt removal from the mind. I think it is doable.  
So my point was that  many beliefs , habits, practices etc were not necessary and may be a burden. 
As rational human beings ,can we have an open mind ,a flexible mind , analyse our beliefs, ask ourselves whether some beliefs are right , Whether some beliefs hurt others or nature, some habits like excess consumption and wastage affect the society and nature, ; and review our beliefs and have the courage to discard some or atleast accept people with different beliefs .
That was my intention. 
If you see the world and people, Mr Srinivasn was telling me that there is a lot of intolerance in the societies. We talk of global living, but still live in this deep well of beliefs, habits and practices.
I don't say that “don't believe in many things. “ But ask a few questions periodically -
Do my beliefs hurt others?
Does my belief bring me benefits or am I a slave to a meaningless practice, should I keep it or discard it ? 
Can I live without a particular belief? 
So my suggestion was to analyse yourself and assert that your buddhi is the boss, not your beliefs, habits, emotions and ego. These are Maya and changeable. If you understand this principle, you understand the first step of vedanta.
We should live with a set of principles , purposes and goals, but not with a huge burden of beliefs, habits and practices and a rigid mindset without viveka and jnana. 

Just like you clean yourself by taking a bath regularly, and clear  your house of dirt and waste, please clean your mind, and clear unwanted beliefs and habits. That is my appeal. 
Greetings
Dks
23/05/25, 5:31 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 722

Let me continue with my discussions on - what are the wastes in mind. I wrote the quote in the context of spiritual aspects or dimension of life to emphasize the essentially of incorporating spiritualism in our life. Pure materialism collects wastes and spiritualism helps in removing the wastes. Science unfortunately hasn't given enough attention to this problem though some neural scientists and psychologists look at it. 
I consider the following as harmful wastes in mind
Wrong and erroneous understanding of facts - see a rope ,think it is a snake.
Wrong assumptions and analysis- this happens in both formal and non formal education. We learn some aspects of science , don't understand the principles correctly and apply them wrongly. We are taught a lot of biases in history and social sciences. 
Beliefs breeding passion, pride, hatred, intolerance, violence, affecting others. 
Ego clouding our decision ingenuity powers 
Emotions like anger affecting  our thinking processes ,clouding our mind  and thereby affecting our welfare and harmony. 

How do we remove these clouds and see a better reality?
Just as we spend time everyday cleaning ourselves and our environment , we should also spend time cleaning our mind. Religion provided some approaches. Satsang is a good approach. Meditation is another approach. Yoga can calm our mind. All these help us to understand our weaknesses and remove them . But the most important activity to be done atleast once in a month is a self review. This is a very detailed review . You should look at your major habits and find out the effects of your habits and beliefs  in your life and identify the positive and negative ones . Look at the connections of your habits and beliefs with society and how it affects you. Look at the impact on your job , your future and decide on actions. Then decide on  what are  to be retained, what are to be discarded,  what are to be modified .


Actually , the cleaning up of our mind is a spiritual activity. 
We moved from IQ to EQ. Neuroscientist Joseph Le Doux raises the issue that some kind of integration or synthesis of heart and head, emotions and thinking (or even brain science and philosophy) might be the way ahead: 
I conclude with the hypothesis, based on trends in brain evolution, that the struggle between thought and emotion may ultimately be resolved, not simply by the dominance of the neocortical cognitions over emotional systems, but by a more harmonious integration of reason and passion in the brain, a development that will allow future humans to better know their true feelings and to use them more effectively in daily life.           
We need to move to SQ now. 


Let us move to my story on IISc. Let me write about my first impressions of bangalore.  
I found Bangalore spread out as a city, not a cramped one like Kolkata or Chennai. 
But it is a city of contrasts . Let me look at Malleswaram first, the sub city near IISc.  
There were many broad roads with good footpaths and a large avenue of trees . The two major roads were called Sampige road and Margosa road. There were huge neem trees at that time. Most houses were bungalows with a large open space with trees. You see jackfruit trees everywhere.  Houses were spaced out. Traffic was minimal. I could walk freely in Sampige road during the evening. We can't dream of it now. 
Combine it with the pleasant weather. It was a paradise for walking. Later I found Basavanagudi to be similar. 
I said it is a city of contrasts. So if we go to Yeshwantpur ,we find the area crowded , streets narrow , houses small with almost no garden and a few trees. Both Malleswaram and Yeshwantpur are adjacent to IISc on opposite sides and present a great  contrast. This surprised me. Fortunately there were no slums in Bangalore then like Bombay and Madras.  I used to see people - families- living in the street in Linghi chetty street where i stayed for a year. 
Bangalore was a divided city . During the pre-independence period, the city part comprising Chamrajpet , Basavanagudi and Malleswaram were governed by a municipality under the control of the Mysore maharaja.  The cantonment was under the military . The civil areas in the east like Ulsoor were under the administration of Madras collector. IISc was attached to the British administration.  So the total city provided a divided look with a mixed population. The city had a lot of kannadigas living there , the civil areas had a lot of Tamils living there and many others like Muslims, Telugu, marattas lived in different areas or pockets. 
Bangalore had many - about 160 - lakes at that time. But unfortunately ,Bangalore had a culture of converting lakes into buildings. Initially bangalore got water from two big lakes - Dhammambudhi and kempambudhi . Both were converted - Dhammambudhi became the bus stand near the railway station later. In 1965, it was a maidan with theatre activities in a tent and exhibition on the ground. By 70s it was converted into a bus stand. Similarly kempambudhi has become a sports complex. we lost other lakes like Mathikere near the institute yielding to houses. This is the starting point of destruction of the drainage system in the city leading to flooding during heavy rains. 
While the narrow north south corridor from yeshwantpur to basavanagudi had a series of settlements, other settlements like Domlur, Ulsoor, Banaswadi , Cantonment were separate and segregated. 
Bangalore with a good climate and lots of gardens was known as a pensioners city. We had a few factories then - BEL and HMT close to IISc, HAL and ITI at other ends being the major ones and a few small ones were there.

More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
24/05/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 723

“Good morning sir.
I understand that IQ, EQ & SQ are interconnected & hence can influence one another. Is it not so? Or is my understanding wrong?.”
My response 
I wrote about a detailed review of one's  actions, beliefs and habits etc with the purposes of understanding the  strengths and weaknesses , the good and bad, the desirability and undesirability of your beliefs , making corrections, changing  some beliefs or habits etc. It improves our life style and we can connect it to emotions. This is the first step to minds management- i believe we have many minds , they interact with each other , they cancel each other minds views and may create confusion. Mind management is an important task of spiritualism.
We go through three stages as a human -
1.Knowledge acquisition , analysis , actions and decisions . We do this in personal , professional and societal life everyday.  We call the different kinds of knowledge, their analysis , application and generation of new knowledge as intelligence. IQ is one , not correct or accurate , index or metric on intelligence.
2.Emotion control  - understand the impacts of emotions and control them . It is EQ
3. Spiritualism - it connects - it is a bridge - it becomes a decider in case of conflicts between minds . It is a bridge between physical material life, intellectual life, emotional life and mental life. It balances our life , brings in happiness. 
Yes ,Nagaraj . There is interdependence between knowledge and emotions. You may create a wrong and erroneous set of facts when you read or listen to a lecture when you are emotionally upset or disturbed or your mind is wandering. 
Again you may act wrongly when emotions are strong. 
That is why mind control - calming the mind, creating a pleasing ambience , prayer - helps in directing our intelligence to action correctly away from emotions.
I focused here on only one aspect - removing some unwanted beliefs and habits through a review and with an open , flexible and adaptable mind 
This detailed review is extremely useful to improve oneself and move up in life. 
I practiced this review regularly. I changed my habits and beliefs and even opinions. 
The first one was a strong habit of daily reading of books . This happened when I joined the high school. In addition to understanding society, people , country , it sharpened my memory. I used to read magazines and there were serials which appeared once a week. I still remember three serials - washingtonil tirumanam by Savi,  Ponniyin selven by Kalki and Thillana mohanambal . When we read a particular issue , we need to remember what happened before. This increased my memory power. I also learnt to remember what I read in a book. That helped in retaining my classroom lectures and even statements by teachers. I learnt about suez crisis by listening to its explanation by a teacher. 
My second habit happened during my College days during PUC time in 1959. It is a new habit built by me of reading English classics and novels. 
The third change that happened was during my college days , it was a change in a belief - shift from religious to spiritual approaches. That was the time I followed a detailed analysis and review of my beliefs. 
The fourth change or I should say a continuous change to be even considered as a first change is my broadening my scope of subjects / disciplines and interests. It started at school level and continued. I showed interest in economics, nature, building construction. I didn't hesitate to learn new subjects or topics unconnected with my curriculum. 
I will discuss more changes in later posts.
Greetings 
Dks
25/05/25, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 724
“No, not I, I will survive
Long as I know how to love, I know I'll stay alive
I've got my life to live
And all my love to give and
I will survive
I, I, I will survive”
“ It took all my strength not to fall apart
Trying with all my might to mend my broken heart
I spent so many nights feeling sorry for myself
How I cried
But now I hold my head up high
And you see me, somebody new
I'm not that lonely little person”
Sung by Gloria Gaynor
Let me continue and look at a few thoughts which changed my thinking directions of my life. 
I was confused about many things in life that were happening. This confusion made me think about them and not worry about my future. Sure I did worry about jobs many times .Let me illustrate a few . 
When I was studying engineering in Madurai  during 1959 to 64 , several thoughts ran through me and I did the reviews and looked for modifications in my thinking and actions. My belief systems changed. 
Let me talk about engineering education's biggest hurdle that is there even today - problem of specialization . Prior to my joining ,engineering was a four year program with only the last two years being for the branch level courses . A lot of general engineering subjects were taught . So specialisation as electrical or mechanical engineer was not considered to be very effective. 
In order to strengthen the knowledge in the specialised areas , the degree program was extended by one more year to six years with the students spending three later years on their area of specialization. This was a major reform then. 
While the curriculum focused on mostly engineering subjects and strengthened both mathematics and sciences, it ignored economics, literature, and humanities. 
I had a nagging doubt - is a narrow specialization a good idea ? 
What was my decision ? To look beyond. 
My decision to go for more serious learning outside the curriculum started at this time. I created interest in knowing about what is happening everywhere and what the future has in store for us . These two questions kept me going throughout my life , kept me active mentally and allowed me to prepare for new areas. Anticipation of change helped me. 
What is the starting point for this change?

I mentioned this before - Schumacher’s lecture in 1959 60. He was a visionary. Later he set up the intermediate technology group in UK. I was involved with discussions on IT - not the present information technology but intermediate technology.  
He talked about dangers for India with Nehruvian policies and suggested alternatives. He quoted extensively from Gandhian thoughts on economy and industrial development. He said that if we followed Nehruvian model, we will create problems and cities will grow huge and uncontrollable.  Surprise is we see what he predicted in 1959 60. He discussed the advantages of intermediate technology as job creation, lesser consumption, lesser use of transports, and lesser pollution. He said biscuits made in Manchester were transported to London and those made in London were transported to Manchester- more diesel use and pollution , not required. He said that was the problem of marginal utility. 
It opened my eyes. But the world was moving towards specialization, I was thinking of generalization. If you have a generalist thinking , you will get outside views, not just inside views. If you are a specialist ,you will get internal views only, outside will escape you leading to Christensen's disruption concept. That is why administrators today have control over engineers, doctors and even generals of army. 
I felt strongly that  generalist have a broader view and multidirectional views compared to specialists.  Generalists have open mind , not a fixed and rigid mind and they consider options and alternatives, but they need inputs from specialists. So a combination is good . But world thinks the other way. 
That was a big concern. Today's major environmental problems were the creation of engineering views . That is why I built an alternate view for Bedthi hydro projects. That was opposed by many engineers.
Greetings 
Dks
26/05/25, 5:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 725
“Western spiritual understanding has grown distant from its roots; Plato’s and Pythagoras’s spiritual training required the utmost rigor of logic and precision of discrimination. Pythagoras taught spirituality through instruction in mathematics, and Plato instituted mathematics as part of the curriculum of his academy. Logical debates were part of Plato’s spiritual training, a practice inspired by Socrates.”
Almas.   Journey home

There was an arithmetic error in my last  post. It was pointed out by Mr Thiruvelan.

"...the degree program..by one more year..to six years..."
You meant five years!”
Thanks Tiruvelan for pointing out the error and correcting it quickly. 

Let me go back to 1965 and see bangalore of those traffic free , spacious bangalore cities - yes I still think that Bangalore was a cluster of small and big towns , not a well interconnected city. I am going to write about public transport . 
I saw and experienced the public bus system in Madurai for five years . It was the best, run by TVS , not nationalised , punctual and with a dynamic scheduling and traffic management. It handled varying traffic load with peak loads like chitra pournami, teppakulam festival and tiruparamkundram festivals when loads were high. That was an ideal design for city transport. Even now I think that TVS understood the importance of a public transport system and realised that the objective is to provide a service - not buses- to meet the dynamic demands of people efficiently , effectively and at affordable cost. They built a highly integrated man- machine- operational managing system . I don't think any city transport has understood this . They realised transport system is not about buses and routes , but about load and traffic management with minimal wait times. We can find excuses for not providing a good service interface most of our cities and look for fancy solutions without understanding the basic principles of urban needs. 
I found the traffic in Calcutta being managed by several modes - buses, minibus, trams and even rickshaws.  Travel took time , traffic jams were common , but transports were available and most inexpensive . The frequency of minibuses and trams were good. You don't have to wait for long. Travel  to Howrah and Ramakrishna mutt took more than an hour . But it was easy to reach Esplanade and other places from RB Avenue. Walking was a good option . Even in the eighties, I found the transport systems in Kolkata to be the same with the metro being an addition. 
Public bus transport in Delhi wasn't good. But Delhi had options in minibuses . But minibuses were crowded - people were packed inside like sardines , you couldn't breathe. Once my friend and I were in a mini bus. He was tall, felt suffocated ,and  so we got down after a few stops. The only common mode of transport was autos - scooters- an expensive option. Connaught place had some more options like motor cycle driven vehicles. Fortunately, the extensive metro network helps in handling some people movements. But poor transport led to people relying on themselves - buying scooters, motor cycles and now cars.
The bus transport system in Madras was reasonable . I used to go to Tiruvottiyur in the north every week days and had no problem in bus availability and travel times. I reached almost every part by bus in Madras.  It also had suburban train service and local services . So Traveling in Madras and later in Chennai even in the nineties was  easy . It wasn't an arduous task even during heavy monsoon rainy days. 
But Bangalore was a total disappointment. It had no options . Travel within the city was not easy- I am using a mild term .
Sometimes , people had  to wait for an hour for a bus  to arrive at the stop. Frequency was erratic. Most buses were terrible. Time management was unknown for the BTS - Bangalore transport service. By mid seventies, they stopped publishing the schedules. The system hasn't changed over a period of more than sixty years. There was no suburban train service . So urgent travel implied the use of autos. But the autos followed their own rules. When it rains, autos stop running. They don't oblige you. Their work culture and customer service were poor. 
Fortunately, there was one route which was good - route 11 going from Malleswaram 18th cross to Gandhi Bazar. North to south winding through the major parts of the city. The frequency was good, you got a bus within half an hour, but the wait time was normally about ten minutes. Some buses ran upto the institute gate. So we could travel to Malleswaram , Swastik,  Majestic , corporation and Basavanagudi   without long waits. But traveling  to NAL , which I had to do from 1966 onwards , to HAL again from 1966 onwards, both for computer work,   was tough. Visits to cinema houses in the night meant that we had to walk back. That state of poor transport system continues even now- one stable continuity.
Greetings
Dks
27/05/25, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 726
“Because of our capacity to imagine, we were able to build Earth as it is today out of virtually nothing. 
In a sense, the notion that thoughts create reality is more than just a nice idea; it’s also a fact of evolution. It was because of language and thought that we could create a world within our minds, and ultimately, it is because of language and thought that we have evolved into the society we have today—for better and for worse.”
Brianna Wiest
DrBabu endorses my views on generalization and Bangalore transport. 
I made a comment that Bangalore is not an interconnected city. Let me explain that statement . 
If you take Chennai, it has a very long north south road connecting George town to Tambaram with mount road playing a prominent part. This allowed connectivity to many parts of Madras. Then the long east coast road is another connection. You can see a criss crossing network of roads connecting most parts. It is a well connected city. Bombay also has many long roads and is also a well connected city. Cities grew along highways. 
But Bangalore is not a connected city. It has patches of good roads. It has many roads leading out to Hosur, Hoskote, Pune, Mysore, Bellary , Kanakapura, Magadi  etc. But they were congested within the city and led to more heavy duty vehicle traffic. We can't go from north to south easily . Chickpet and cotton pet are narrow roads and don't aid large traffic flows. Our connectivity between areas is poor. That is the reason for traffic jams. 
In 1972, I conducted a short term course on  optimization and was discussing this course with Prof Dhawan, director. I told him about commonsense optimization and the public transport problem in bangalore. I said optimising the schedule is of not much use . Then   I told him that BTS has 450 buses , but the public sector companies like HAL,ITI, BEL and HMT had about 600 buses and they remain idle for some parts of the day. Some of the buses can be leased to BTS to run during peak hours. This will lead to total fleet optimization.  He liked the idea and wanted to pursue it . But the companies were not agreeable  and so it didn't succeed. 

Let me look at the next aspect - My interest in kannada
I had a small exposure to Kannada prior to coming to bangalore.  In my younger days , it was through two media - Purandara dasara kritis in carnatic music , and Udupi hotels in Tirunelveli . Surprisingly I didn't find a Udupi  hotel in Madurai. My Kannada knowledge took another small step in Madras. Two senior officers in the factory were kannadigas. I used to talk to them and picked up a smattering of Kannada. Also,  most hotels I frequented in Madras were run by Udupi  people. I used to hear some Kannada terms there. Still my exposure to kannada was minimal. I learnt more Telugu words. 
My eagerness to learn Kannada started in Bangalore from the beginning.  There was no opportunity to learn Kannada in the mess as most workers spoke Tamil. But I picked up a bit of Kannada in the department.  Office staff spoke in Kannada . Some faculty spoke to the office staff in Kannada . Most of my kannada speaking and understanding started with conversations with a few classmates, a few hostel mates and a few employees and staff. So by 1966, in more than a year, I picked up enough kannada vocabulary to manage conversations. I found learning and speaking kannada was easy ,as most words have a commonality with Sanskrit and Tamil . I continued with my kannada conversation in general and avoided speaking in Tamil to kannada people.   In 1968, I started learning Kannada alphabets. 
As I said earlier, I became friendly with Mr PA Bukebag from TIFR who used to visit IISc every summer to run the summer schools. I used to talk to him mostly in kannada and he wanted to see kannada movies . So i went with him. That also helped my kannada knowledge. He wanted to read Shivarama karanth's novels and we borrowed them from Ranade library. I got acquainted to kannada literature slowly. I also listened to G P Rajarathnam speaking simple kannada and liked his rhymes. So my understanding of kannada improved consistently. Constant practice helped me. Later my visits to rural schools and my stay at vidhana soudha improved my kannada.
Greetings
Dks
28/05/25, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 727

Vinod Vyasulu has commented on the divisiveness of Bangalore now Bengaluru.
“Bangalore was designed to be not connected. We had the pete, the Mysore part around City Market in the west. . Then to the east the British set up the cantonment...then called the City and Civil Station under their control. Cubbon Park, then much bigger than now, separated them  There was an east west zonation but the two had different cultures. I understand there was also at times a customs barrier between the two. Even now after so many years, there is a discernable difference.”

My response
Bangalore was never an integrated city. It had three separate sections - city comprising Basavanagudi to Malleswaram governed by Mysore government,  Cantonment under british military control and civil and military station under Madras collectorate. But that is not important . 
Bangalore had about 200 lakes , many big ones , these divided the Bangalore city. Next, Bangalore had many gardens , the biggest being Lalbagh and Cubbon park , they divided the city. 
The third was the composition of people . Most middle class people lived in traditional areas like Basavanagudi , Malleswaram,  Chamrajpet etc.  These people worked for the Mysore government.  Most people in the east area worked for the military and spoke Tamil. Merchants concentrated in the central part of the city like chickpet, Taragupet , Balepet, cotton pet etc. That was a congested area with narrow roads. 
Another important aspect ,reason for the divisiveness of Bangalore was the presence of a large number of agricultural areas in the city. I had seen the west of Rajajinagar was full of agricultural fields, similarly Domlur - reaching the HAL airport was difficult especially when it rained. Domlur was a low lying area and the road used to get flooded. So reaching HAL and NAL was not easy for me as autos won't go to that area. 
Similarly many outer parts in the south, east and west grew many vegetables and Bangalore was famous for chow chow- known as chayote squash -  and cucumber. The only problem was that these vegetables were grown in untreated water. 
Post independence, the city Planners didn’t want to integrate. They allowed the existing state to continue on the assumption that Bangalore won't grow. Even Sir MV had the same idea and he opposed the construction of the Tippegondanahalli reservoir on Arkavati saying that Bangalore's population won't increase. 
I recall a discussion in 1968 with the KEB executive engineer in charge of Bangalore city's electricity distribution. I was telling him that I had developed several regression models and wanted to test them for estimating the growth of Bangalore's demand. I wanted the city data. He dismissed me saying he didn't want any model. He said that he was sure  the majestic area won't grow and gave adhoc numbers for the growth of other areas. I was shocked. He was proved wrong. 
Also the city improvement board - later BDA - planned the huge Rajajinagar area and later Jayanagar area creating big islands . 
The city started growing with the arrival of public sector units like HAL, ITI, BEL and HMT and it had many electrical manufacturing units close to IISc like kirloskar, MEI, porcelain factory , Mysore lamps etc. 
With strong electronics , aerospace strengths , the city started growing fast from 1980 onwards. We in the institute felt the city's growth by finding difficulty in getting houses for rent by the mid 70s. Houses for rent became scarce by then. Rents went up beyond the reach of our faculty. Many faced eviction. By the 80s many areas like Vijayanagar , Indira nagar , palace orchards etc started developing to provide accommodation to the growing city. So the outer areas expanded , but inner areas went upwards and struggled to meet the traffic growth. Malleswaram now is crowded with many apartment blocks and has grown vertically. It is no longer that peaceful ,quiet area it was. 
Fortunately,  the planning for water supply to the city has been good. First , we got water from Arkavati river and then from Cauvery river. 
More in next
Greetings 
Dks
29/05/25, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 728

Till the early seventies, many cities had many more industries than bangalore, with Calcutta and Bombay leading up front. But the scene changed from late seventies. Initially in the sixties and early seventies , Bangalore north had more industries.  R Venkatraman introduced the concept of industrial estates in guindy and it became popular. During Nijalingappa's period, Bangalore started with Rajajinagar industrial estate and then built a big estate or a city in Peenya. That was the largest. It took Bangalore up by a few notches in industrialisation. Then other estates came up one by one and the electronic city came up in 1978 by Keonics. These led to the growth of several hundreds to thousands of small, medium and large industries. Today industries are everywhere. There are thousands of startups, global centres and IT services units. Bangalore is way ahead of other cities now. I feel that IISc played a significant role in this transformation.  
The next adjustment for me  was  the food culture. Again there are many differences with Madras though many good veg restaurants in Madras were run by Udupi cooks. They in Madras prepared food  to suit the culture and taste of local people . 
But here you get the original Udupi food with changes suitable for bangalore. 
My opportunities to eat out were minimal as the mess food was sumptuous, and wholesome with Sunday specials. Still I experimented eating outside occasionally . My first experience was with coffee. In 1965, there was no eating place in the institute other than the mess and no coffee shops. I had a friend ,Mr J Purnanandam. He was quite a senior to me doing PhD work in the management department- it was not known as management department then ,but as humanities and social sciences department running an evening diploma program in management .
He wanted coffee . So during my vacation times, i used to go for coffee with him to Malleswaram 17th cross or 18th cross. There were two hotels . I found coffee served in small tumblers unlike in Madras. Even with the fact that the quantity is small , I saw a new practice - called  by two service, sharing of one coffee by two people . Later I saw many variations of this unique by two service becoming two by five or three by five etc. All were served without any grumbling and happily unlike the curse word ,” savu krakki”- dying fellow in literal translation-  which I used to hear in Madras.  
We didn't have many restaurants in Malleswaram. So alternates came up. The other prominent feature was many petty shops selling  bun butter and jam as well as Badam milk . Then I found many bakery shops called Iyengar bakery- a bangalore invention and very popular and useful for households and hungry people. These provided less expensive options. 
I have heard about the famous MTR and visited it once ,but they don't give Dosa in the evening, but the rava idly and coffee were fabulous. You had to wait first outside, then inside and later ushered into the dining area. You can see the open kitchen as you enter. It suffered losses when the government introduced price control and even closed its doors for a few years due to the unsustainable price restrictions imposed by the government.  Even now ,MTR is an experience . 
Bangalore had many special dishes like rava idly,  kali Dosa, set Dosa, Mysore Masala Dosa, Akki roti,  etc. Rice idly was  available only in the morning hours in those days. It was rava idly afterwards. Ragi is a staple food for many, but wasn't available in traditional Udupi hotels. They used jaggery and coconut in sambar. Rasam was known as tili saru.  
My classmate Thakkar started a coffee place in the gymkhana in 1966. Coffee culture started then. From then on , coffee shop  became a mandatory entity in the institute campus. Mid morning and mid afternoon coffee became a standard activity for many - students, staff and faculty. It affected our work culture. 
Greetings
Dks
30/05/25, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 729
I observed a nice and consistent  tendency in Bangalore for the past 60 plus years.I don't know about other cities . But Bangalore settled people - I don't know whom to call bangaloreans, kannada chaluvalis may not approve- mostly compared Bangalore of their days and now ,saying that it was heaven then and hell now. It includes people who lived from the sixties or from the eighties or even from 2000 onwards. This was and is a constant refrain I heard and hear from many . Everyone of these settlers - whether they came in the 60s or 80s or 2000- established an affinity to the city. That is great despite all the difficulties of traffic . The city maintains its unique intellectual culture , very different from Delhi. Still it lags Chennai on other aspects like music, dance, public lectures etc. But while it supported literature, it was stronger in Mysore ,Belgaum,Dharwad and Mangalore. 


Let me return to look at my life at IISc.  
IISc offered a lot of opportunities to learn and to do research. Most faculty teaching courses had in-depth knowledge and practical exposure. 
The institute always assisted Indian industries , public sector companies, utilities and defence establishments. It had fantastic experimental facilities . To name a few 
The electron microscope - only one in the country- , in CISL, wind tunnels - again unique-, extensive hydraulics facilities, AC network analyser - the only one in the country-  ,a well equipped workshops rivaling big machine tool industries, ,an anechoic chamber in ECE etc. Institute excelled in experimental research and development work in science and engineering.  Let me give one example of  practical exposure . 
The EE department had an AC network analyser . It can simulate large power grids . It was used to design all power grids of India. Throughout a year, it was kept busy by the electricity boards in the country doing their planning studies. Each board booked it for a month of studies. Prof Narayana Iyengar did these studies.  So he is knowledgeable about Indian power systems . He was teaching power system analysis for us. 
The second great advantage is the global connect. Many faculty had a PhD from a good foreign university. This helped us to know what is happening in the western universities and what are the current research areas. Our curriculum was compared with that of MIT. We are not frogs in the well. Prof Joseph was conducting research in the growing ,new area of power electronics . Prof M D Srinath used to teach advanced topics in controls. So we could do research in the latest cutting edge areas. This is true of many departments. So it spurred our research by students and faculty and established a competitive work ethics - everyone gets into a serious study and research framework. No one sits idle on his past laurels.  
The third advantage and opportunity of global connect is the visit by many experts from abroad and their lectures and discussions. These were planned as lectures by Prof Kalman and may be unplanned also. There are a large number of unplanned lectures.Let me recount one such incident . Prof Sana from university of Chicago was in Bangalore on vacation  and called Prof HNR . Prof HNR invited him to give a talk. He came the next day and gave a talk. That is the informal level of connects. Sana later became a good friend of mine. He started visiting us regularly. Prof Kailath is another regular visitor. 
There were many general lectures . I listened to CV Raman , Sir MV, Tandan,  MD of Lever, JRD Tata, and many more. Most students attended these lectures then. The PE 303 hall was overflowing during many lectures. It enhanced our knowledge and gave us a peep into what is happening here and elsewhere in many sectors. 
The next was the opportunity of attending conferences. Many conferences were held in the institute . At that time ,we had only two halls - one was the library seminar hall ,another was PE 303 in our building . Faculty hall came later. Seminar complex came much later due to the efforts of Prof Ramaseshan and later Prof CNR Rao. I got into the conference presentations process from 1967 onwards and had till now attended hundreds of conferences. Look at my exposure and networking advantages - all due to IISc encouragement,training and culture.  All these and an egalitarian outlook are part of IISc ambience. 

That is what I mean by the opportunities for learning afforded by IISc.  Such opportunities were not available in most institutions in India at that time or even now. 
IISc is shy of showcasing its achievements and its great ambience. 
Greetings 
Dks
31/05/25, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 730

Let me discuss the heart of IISc. What does the general ambience reveal to you and make  you learn ? I understood these after a few years of staying at IISc.  These are some core principles that were evolved over a period of time, accepted and practised. They were not told to you explicitly. You observe , learn , understand and adapt to them as far as possible. If not, you are left behind.

It teaches ,adapts and follows certain characteristics or qualities that a person should follow. Let me list them. 
Seriousness, interest  and commitment in your work . I found that even clerical staff and mess staff followed this. 
Freedom and independence. No fear of the unknown. 
Open and flexible and adaptable thinking and actions
Curiosity to know why and how . Participation in most academic activities of the department by even a junior faculty. This creates awareness , answers the question why , builds friendship and inculcates and improves decision making capabilities of individuals. Many decisions by the institute are taken after a lot of discussions at many levels. We don't mind reversing decisions. 
Strong affinity to fundamental principles ,modeling, design , analysis, experimentation, . The faculty understood the underlying core of some basics of engineering like fluid mechanics, solid mechanics, thermodynamics,modeling, analysis etc. Also we started looking at instrumentation as a core area with a separate centre for instrumentation.  Similarly, energy was looked at with a broader view . That was the reason for setting up an integrated power engineering department. Borders were ignored . Electronics was an important area in many departments. 
Focus on engineering constraints like reliability, repeatability, affordability, etc.
Forward, futuristic , outward looking and thinking.  This is a fundamental quality in the institute. First you look outside - what other institutions are doing, what your peers are working on, how the world is developing, what are the hurdles, what should one anticipate etc. Looking outside and working in another institution in India or abroad is mandatory for promotion. It promotes a holistic vision. Frog in the well approach was discredited.
Futuristic assessment and thinking allowed the institute to grow and be in the forefront of research. It allowed IISc to lead in many areas. Futuristic thinking is essential in today's fast changing volatile world. It prepares you to adapt to these changes, modify your life and maintain stability . Agility is also needed. Agility and futuristic thinking need a flexible open mind. 
Dynamic restructuring , decentralization, delegation and responsibility. This is a key distinguishing component of IISc and I played a big part in this. 
Quick movement to newer areas and setting up groups, centres of learning in the newer areas. This helped in cross fertilization of ideas. From ten departments in 1965, the institute grew into more than 40 units now. Informal grouping was useful. 
Decision making capabilities.- Even a junior most faculty can independently decide on what he should do, how he should teach, how he should conduct research, how he should grow etc. Similarly, when industries came up with their problems , faculty could assess them, analyse them , decide on the issues, decide on solutions and come up with total solutions. This helped in creating a thriving industrial consultancy. 
Realism ,applications , helpfulness. 
Experimentation was given importance. 
Importance for intrinsic qualities and not external show. 

Greetings 
Dks
01/06/25, 5:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 731
I looked at the academic side of IISc.  So 
Let me talk a bit about the cultural ambience at IISc. It was quite rich, embracing many languages and regional cultures . We had several associations representing the culture of linguistic groups like Kannada Sangha, malayalam group, sanskrit group, Telugu samiti, Tamil peravai , Hindi group etc.  They organised many functions and cultural programs  and so you get a better understanding of the cultures. Your appreciation leads to tolerance.  Many giant literature writers and poets  visited and lectured . Ranade library contained thousands of books in different languages in addition to a large collection of English novels. 
This mixing of people from different places reveals different lifestyles. One thing the south Indians got upset about was seeing a north indian eating with their left hand , southerners consider it terrible. You learnt to ignore it and most north Indians over some time period also avoided that habit. 
One very important thing I learnt at IISc is to look at the intrinsic worth of an aspect and not the  outer shows. I recall an anecdote in Ramakrishna Paramahansa's life. He had three disciples.  One day he told his three disciples to go into the next room one by one and drink milk kept in tumblers. 
The first disciple went and drank milk from a gold tumbler , the second from a silver tumbler and the third from a copper tumbler. The milk was the same in all tumblers.
He asked his disciples,” how satisfied are you?”. The third one said that he was unhappy that others drank from gold and silver and he got only a copper one. The second one who drank from silver was partially unhappy. This shows how much importance we give for appearance. 
This behaviour is common even now. We go to a restaurant because of its great appearance , not because of the food served there. 
I imbibed this intrinsic look in my activities . Later when I went to hundreds of institutions to lecture or inspect , I always told them about this and said that choices are in the hands of an individual. He should decide whether he wants a beautifully packaged item or a good quality item. Even educational institutions try to attract students by showing their infrastructure , not their teaching capabilities. 
You may ask me how I look for intrinsic worth of a project or institution? 
I had some discussions with my friend Aravind of TCS about this . 
I will look for several things
1.Definitely outputs like products developed, employment status , no of distinctions , internal qualities like transparency, participation , good governance etc.
2.Publications and research areas as well as new research areas
3.transparency, participation , delegation and discussions as part of governance
4.impressions of peers and others
5 periodic reviews by outsiders and corrections
6.mindset of people - fixed , open, forward looking etc.
7.institutional history. 
8. Analysis of efforts 
9. Clarity on future directions. - I tell you one incident  that there was a mandate that all institutions should have vision and mission statements. Well dutifully many built a statement - may be copied and modified. But it was there on their display- no review was done to find out whether they followed them. No understanding of them by management, faculty and students. I consider this as great intellectual failure.
10. Even though I put it last , I consider this as the biggest malaise - the emphasis on discipline and control and the consequent fear it generates from these  focuses. Fear produces morons and slaves, not inquisitive , always searching for truth , and intelligent humans. 
Alister Mclean wrote a novel “ fear is the key” in the 60s. The title made an impression in me . I recall the first departmental faculty I attended after joining as a faculty. I was the junior most ,but expressed my opinions even in the first meeting,  even though I was sitting at the end of a big table  ,not very strongly but mildly and didn't allow it to die. I remember the reaction of Prof Joseph at the end of the meeting. He said,” You are fearless”. I cherish that statement. Many disliked me because of my openness. Some seniors wanted obedience,  not openness. 
Greetings
Dks
02/06/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 732
There are some comments 
Prof V Sridhar:
[31/05, 10:33 am] V.Sridhar Ex PESCE: 👆🏼 wonderful write up sir. This is a very interesting write up. This will be a road map for any instruction to grow and excel.
Thank u very much for sharing your thoughts.
[31/05, 11:45 am] V.Sridhar Ex PESCE: The greatest lessons from IISc are not inscribed in its manuals, but in its quiet corners—in the way people work, collaborate, and think. An institution grows not just through plans and policies, but through a collective mindset built on seriousness, freedom, curiosity, forward-thinking, and realism.

Any institute that aspires to grow must do more than build departments or expand infrastructure. It must build culture. And culture is built in the unnoticed moments—how a junior faculty participates in meetings, how a technician cares for a machine, how decisions are made, and how freedom is honored.

This roadmap, inspired by IISc, shows that the heart of a great institution beats in its values. If followed with sincerity and adapted with contextual sensitivity, these principles can guide any institution toward lasting greatness.

My response 
Thanks Sridhar. It is a nice analysis and desire.

Mr Jitendhar:
“Morning Sir, thank you for sharing your thoughts. These are more than mere thoughts, thought provoking and to understand why these differences exist between different social structures(campuses). Thanks once again, you have a good day Sir..”

Thanks Jitendhar.

Mr Mathew Chacko
“Excellent approach 👌✨.  Thanks for sharing, Sir 🙏”
Thanks Mr Mathew

Mr Chandrasekhar, rtd. security officer, IISc
“Sir
What you penned down was IISc but IISc is now changed in contrast to what you shared which are best practices, culture and tradition of yester years glory.”

Thanks Chandrasekhar. 
I will expand on this aspect in the next post. 
Thanks a lot everyone.
Greetings 
Dks
02/06/25, 8:51 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sir, very profound explanation of the ethos of IISc!
03/06/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 733
“we learnt patience, resilience, hard work, and hospitality. These values have declined in many countries, but are alive and well in India.
India dances to its own tune. “
“At any time, India is rich in humanity, excitement, and challenge, but also intensely demanding, hard, and wearing. There’s no country like it, and if GDP were measured in souls, India wins”
Jasper Reid, British interpreters who stayed for 12 years in India.


Dr Chanakya has some deep comments:
“Fear, more often designated as hesitation, has almost always made us miss the bus carrying opportunities leaving us unhappy and unfulfilled in our yearning to rise in the academic ladder.  It always leaves a deep sense of regret and frustration for not acting it out when one could very well carry things forward.  Prof DKS Please discuss some details as to how such accumulated misses build up the frustration levels that need very strong internal efforts to break away from.

I believe that intricately connected to the inability to be fearless is also our inner fear to be proved wrong.  In such cases it is "safer to withhold" than to speak up/out.  Would you please elaborate as to how well connected it is to our paucity of the required type of humility.  

Alistair MacLean's "Fear is the key" was a powerful eye opener for me too.  A key character in this story 'Jablonsky' went along with an interesting motto in life "what is possible shall be done, what is impossible will be done".

Prof. please reflect up on the nexus between being fearless, hesitation in the face of being wrong and the type of humility needed to accept other's opinion, if they are better than yours.  The path of science and technology is replete with this "trianglular trials and trails".
 My response 
There are a number of points in the comments all centering around courage and determination and humility as three pillars. 
You have hit the nail where it hurts. 
Most people don't know themselves. That is the starting point and the lesson taught first to most middle class children - don't do this, that , don't talk to him, don't get involved , don't touch the insect, go away from places where people quarrel etc- a lot of nos.  It builds timidity and kills curiosity.So they doubt their capabilities. They don't know what they are capable of doing. So they don't want to experiment and venture out. Like the three monkeys , they run away from evil or suffer silently . That is why mafias thrive.  Not even they don't venture out , but they don't think about what is happening, what will happen and why all these are happening. They close their eyes and stay where they are, not interested in taking a step forward. It is what the youngsters call today a comfort zone. Is it a good strategy? It worked in the 20th century but will not work during the coming days . These people will be slaves throughout their life and never become leaders. 
Let me give a few incidents witnessed by me. I have come across hundreds . 
In the sixties , the institute was an open area without compound walls . So people from outside used to leave the cattle to graze near our hostels . The security persons were afraid of driving them as they had to face the wrath of the cattle owners when they went to Yeshwantpur. 
I had seen many Bangalore students refusing to take up jobs outside the city. I had argued with them , but without success. One of them when offered a promotion and transferred to Hyderabad, he didn't want to go and refused transfer. He was timid and comfortable. 
Recall the regime of Mr Gundu Rao as our CM. Mafia was ruling many areas like Yeshwantpur and subramania Nagar. KVIISc was threatened. Agitations and disruptions were common.  When Ramakrishna Hegde became the CM , he ordered all these to be rounded up and city became calm. Mr Sethu Rao who lived in Subramania Nagar told me that they rounded up six persons and everything was fine. Today , all cities are ruled by Mafias. CMs ignore that. 
Bangalore had seen many big and violent agitations and the police stood by. Why? They are not doing their duties due to fear. 
I saw courage for the first time in my life on foreign policy matters . Mr Jaishankar stood firmly against Europe, US and China courageously . His clarity was great.  
Many faculty don't open their mouths in most institutions. They define their boundaries, close their eyes  and don't see evil in the college. I have witnessed hundreds of such instances across the country. I didn't see this in many western countries.
Surprisingly ,I had two senior colleagues in the two departments - EE and CSA- I was associated with for decades , who were afraid of facing audiences and speaking in conferences. One didn't attend any conference and another didn't even teach properly. Don't mistake me , both are great researchers producing many PhDs. They didn't participate in discussions in the meetings. 
So it is clear that  fear destroys humanism .
Let us not loose hope. There are millions of courageous people. Courage is encouraged by open social networks today. 
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
04/06/25, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 734
“I have striven not to laugh at human actions, not to weep at them, not to hate them, but to understand them.”
—Baruch Spinoza,
This quote is repeated again as it is relevant for our discussions on human actions. 
We need to understand that fear like all behavioural factors is not absolute. It varies according to situations . One may be forceful in professional life, but timid in family life. One may be forceful in individual discussions ,but silent in groups. One gets angry at unfairness to him, but quiet when unfairness happens for others - self interest. 
While fear is more generic and may be due to past behaviours and adrenaline generation of the hunter era , our dependence on fear today under various circumstances is inappropriate. We need to build strong corrective mechanisms at a young age. 
Here is where the importance of viveka - discrimination - as told by Sankara comes in. We have many complex behaviours resulting in different reactions and actions for each event happening in our life. The responses can be impulsive or thoughtful. We need to understand the overall situation ,analyse, find fault with our reasoning and make corrections. That is Viveka. 
Chanakya is right that fear has led to frustrations. Many people lost opportunities to advance their career because of not explaining their work properly , and because of wrong notions. Fear can lead to misunderstanding and problems of communication. I have seen frustrations and failures in the institute . Many don't have clarity of purpose in their work, in their approaches and in their thinking. They all need behaviour training and mental improvements.
But hesitation is more general . It occurs when you have to act or decide on a specific issue . It may happen due to many reasons like 
1.not sure of the facts
2.not sure of what will happen if I decide- a lack of clarity and analysis. I have seen some people act based on the clarity they generate on a situation. Two people that  I had interacted with come to my mind for their clarity of thinking. One is CNR Rao and another is Chandra, chairman , Tata sons. CNR is a quick thinker and acts fast. Chandra is  a clear and measured thinker and takes correct decisions. 
3.non availability of data - you are yet to collect data and so you  delay actions. Some researchers use non availability of data as an excuse for not working on a problem. Some want to do a complete literature survey and data collection and only after that will proceed with actions. These lead to considerable delays. 
4.limited views - not aware of what is happening and what will happen.
5. As TV Gopal says , fear of failure may be another reason. But it means that  you have ideas about the approaches to solve a problem . Research may lead to dead ends . One should be prepared for that. Our existing system accepts only successes and does  not accept a concluding statement from a researcher that a particular approach or a method does not work due to some reasons . A mindset change is needed here.
5. Timidity , fear are the other reasons for hesitation.
6. Procrastination is a habit with some. I know one chair of a department who will push all papers inside his table drawer without taking any action. Students used to pick their requests from his drawer and ask him to sign it. Decision making is not known to him. He was such a slow and timid person that I lost patience with him. 
What are the aspects which have to be rectified?
Improve the behaviour. 
Better thinking practices.
Better self awareness. Know your weaknesses
Better mentoring . This is totally missing in our system. Some seek advice from others, some listen to what is going on and understand it, some listen to others advice, some reject advice given with good intentions. Three major hurdles exist . One is  shyness - you don't know people, you can't assess people ,you don't get data , you misinterpret. So you make a mistake and go deeper into your shell.  Shyness needs a cure. Second is ego - at the other end . Ego clouds your mind. You think that you know everything and don't need to listen to others. This is the reason for problems encountered by many. Third is a closed mind. We need an open mind. 

Humility is definitely an important trait to have. Humility minimizes one's ego. It puts a check in our wrong thinking. It makes us to learn from failures. 
One example of humility at the leadership level that I have seen was an incident with Prof Dhawan, our director. 
He was supporting a particular change in a procedure in the senate. After hearing the opposition to the proposal from a few members , he told the senate that he would withdraw the bill and come back with a new modified one. We discussed our admission ranking parameters for several years and changed them regularly. It is the open mind that tells us that ego is bad and humility is desirable. 
Humility doesn't mean fickle minded person ,but it means that you build an opinion based on your perceptions and facts ,but be prepared to accept better suggestions from others. That means “ be open to ideas from others, be flexible, keep looking at your opinions for improvements.  Know that nothing is real and fixed all the time. Follow the Shankara - jagat Mitya - principle.”

Greetings
Dks
05/06/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 735

In the world , nothing has more variety than the dynamic variations in human behaviours and moods  - developing habits and emotions , using and changing. Your actions depend on your behaviours. Life depends on this - not your behaviours alone . Your action depends on others behaviours and moods and your interactions with others Observations and communications play a major role in the behaviour development of a person. We miss this aspect in our teaching and learning program . Some parents train their children to have good habits and behaviours.  
Agatha Christie was a well known crime writer. But while I love Hercule Poirot,  I admire and analyze Miss Marple . The stories pertaining to Miss Marple are based on Observations of behaviours of normal people . The behaviours provided clues to solve murders. These books tell us the importance of understanding behaviours. 
Our behaviours come from our training and beliefs. Those with a flexible and open mind can change their beliefs and retrain to adapt to different situations. But many have fixed minds and follow their beliefs religiously. 
Most of us are led to a blinked life with very narrow views. This is not desirable ,but like cattle we are herded into a pen of society determined, science determined and education determined beliefs , notions and conjectures and loose independent and open ended  views and a broad world view. 
We are made into  conditioned and blinkered people. This destroys our independent thinking leading to a question - since a human is distinguished as a thinking animal and we lose that power , are we humans or simulated robots?
There is an urgent need to build an alternative free thinking curiosity building education system  - not a few schools but lakhs of schools. That is required to meet AI challenges and new jobs - skilling the mind ,not physical skills. We need mental education, not mechanical moronic education. 

Some comments
TV Gopal
“Thank you Sir for this post. IISc has a strong influence in my way of working and research The question is : Fear of what? Is it fear of failure that manifests on the stakeholders once the "King" position of IISc is in to focus? The cost of failure spirals as one tends to labor intensive works even a few points below the professional engineering.  Hence, it is perhaps better positioned more on the lines of Fear - Uncertainty - Doubt [FUD] factors. Now what is Fear? Some doubts will remain......Advanced science progresses...- Dr. T V Gopal, Anna University, Chennai, India
Thanks Gopal
Greetings 
Dks
06/06/25, 5:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 736
“How do you listen? Do you listen with your projections, through your projection, through your ambitions, desires, fears, anxieties, through hearing only what you want to hear, only what will be satisfactory, what will gratify, what will give comfort, what will for the moment alleviate your suffering? If you listen through the screen of your desires, then you obviously listen to your own voice; you are listening to your own desires. And is there any other form of listening? Is it not important to find out how to listen not only to what is being said but to everything— to the noise in the streets, to the chatter of birds, to the noise of the tramcar, to the restless sea, to the voice of your husband, to your wife, to your friends, to the cry of a baby? “
Jiddu Krishnamurti 
Another comment :

Prashant Joshi
Dear Sir! 

“It is always  a pleasure to listen to your views and get so much from the work you have done. What you have jotted down is not merely a; *it is a manifesto for meaningful academia*. It reminds us that excellence is not cultivated by policy alone but by unseen values, shared expectations, and quiet conviction. What’s captured here is not just the legacy of a great institution but the soul of what learning environments ought to be, where inquiry is fearless, fundamentals are honored, and decisions are driven by depth, not hierarchy.

To future educators and academic leaders: *May we not just deliver knowledge, but design environments where such a culture naturally thrives. It needs to be an environment where curiosity, integrity, experimentation, and humility become everyday habits.*

Over past decade I have worked with three institutions and what you said deeply aligned with the work I am involved in. There is a need for the leadership to reimagine their purpose, culture, and practices. It needs to be a conscious shift from bureaucracy to living ecosystems of learning, discovery, and transformation.

Too often, institutions are bound by structure but lack soul. At some level, where I can influence, I have made it my mission to help them rediscover that soul, not through grand reform plans, but by returning to core truths: that institutions must not only teach, but nurture thinkers, doers, and questioners in spaces that are free, fearless, and future-ready.

In the rush to get skilled, institutions must not forget building those environments that build more than just the skill; but foundation that can nurture talent, skill and competency for a long term impact.
My response
Thanks. Prashant. 
I have earlier talked about leadership role , some great indian leaders and the lack of vision with most Indian leaders not only in the academic field but also in research, politics and industries. 
Most Indian leaders are administrators . That is the tragedy in this country. We give phenomenal emphasis for rules and administrators. They love it and it gives them control over others.  That is ruining us. 
First a leader should have courage. He should run a participative,  open and transparent governance system . 
A leader should have viveka - discriminatory power. 
If a leader is good, the unit under him runs well. 
If a leader is transformative, he changes an institution or government. I gave examples of Prof Prahlada Rao of MSRIT, Ramakrishna Hegde, ex CM of karnataka in this category. 
If a leader is great, he is visionary,  he builds a futuristic unit. Dr Bhabha, Dr Sarabhai, Prof Dhawan, Mr Chandrasekharan.
What the country needs is a lot of visionary leaders and we don't have them or more correctly we  don't search for them and choose them. Vice chancellors are chosen by caste and money . We find a goal setting leader in Modi ,the first PM to set goals. No academic leaders set long term research goals. 
Dr Sanjay Chitnis 
“Sir, very profound explanation of the ethos of IISc!”
Thanks to all.
Greetings
Dks
07/06/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 737
“Whatever the mind can conceive and believe, it can achieve.” it is the secret to all that has been and all that will ever be. Yes, critical thinking is the secret. The human mind is so powerful and it is factual that everything that’s happening in our life is attracted by our thoughts. Thoughts become things.”
Christ Lewis

Before I go for more comments , let me get back to IISc and its important demerit . 
While academically IISc ticked all quality boxes , it has its warts also. That is what Mr Chandrasekhar referred to in his comments.
Academics needed a supportive and understanding administration and a fast acting positive finance. 
We initially had no separate finance department.  Administration was very minimal. 
So things were smooth. All decisions were done at the department level. We didn't depend on a central admin . It was a great period. 
SS Prabhu as registrar, a clever devil ,wanted to grab power as much as possible. 
Though prof Dhawan was the director, and a dominant one, Mr Prabhu had worked with AG Pai as registrar. Pai was known to be a terror and didn't care for the then director ,Prof Bhagawantam . Prabhu couldn't ignore the director ,so he diplomatically maneuvered the rules and built a big structure with many officers. One single admin office became eight units and from one assistant registrar, the officer's numbers went up to seven  in his tenure. He built a huge administration structure. That started the problems for the institute. Today the admin occupies several buildings. It has grown huge. It created labour problems leading to the creation of unions and agitations. 
Control of administration depended only on the director initially . So they didn't serve the institute but treated themselves as masters. If a director understands the role of administration,  then the institute can function efficiently. If a director is weak , administration overrides him. 
We had only two directors who were powerful enough to control the administration.  They are Prof Dhawan and Prof CNR Rao. Even a weak director like  Prof Ramaseshan did well and created a chief of administration post and appointed a professor in that position. Many senior faculty didn't support him. But he was active , understood the ethos and planned for growth. 
Ramaseshan's short period saw great growth. A large number of centres came up. He set up executive committees to reform the library and computer centre. I was part of many reform activities of Prof Ramaseshan.  He planned for a super computer. Part of admin control went to the new chief. As a whole his governance was research and academic growth focused. Only a few buildings had come up in his time. CES , centre for ecological sciences and CAS ,centre for atmospheric sciences were started during his tenure. I became a member of CES. 
Some other directors understood the importance of academics and didn't bother about admin.
But some directors didn't understand the ethos of IISc and they left all governance to the administration.  It affected our research and academics . It led to stagnation.  It was a tragedy. 
I call some regimes golden periods and some dark periods. 
Our admin is known for its inefficiency - it misses papers . It even missed my life certificate once and stopped pension payments- . Administration delayed processing papers. Delays become epidemic. 
Our bills and schemes units were not fully organized. With ERP in place, I hope there is improvement in the functioning of the institute. 
Another problem I see and feel sad about is the fact that the institute, from a natural paradise, is becoming a slum - too many buildings, too crowded, less open space, poor drainage network . Buildings are not planned properly. There is no soul or synergy in our expansions. So  the institute is now an architectural chaos . 
But one reason the institute survived was the committee structure expanded by Prof Dhawan.  Most activities were decided by committees. Admin implemented the decisions. So faculty, especially the chair of the committees, had control over the implementation. I  was the chair of power committee, time table committee, central evaluation committee , grievance committee , campus amenities committee , CSA curriculum committee and CS programs development committee and member of several committees. This structure gave opportunities for faculty to develop policies, to decide on many matters of academics and governance, and to get to know the culture of IISc.  
But I have to say this as an observation of mine:
Faculty did their job even when directors didn't direct.. They did their research. They were active and participative . So the institute didn't suffer. It went on growing academically. Its status as number one in the national ranking for the past years proves this. 
Admin delayed decisions. But Some technical staff are identified by departments to chase the files. So the follow up was very good. The reason for this is the fact that while central admin is not responsive, the departmental admins who were controlled by the chair and faculty, were quite active and responded fast . They helped in the smooth running of the department. 
Greetings
Dks
08/06/25, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 738

Listening is an art not easily come by, but in it there is beauty and great understanding. 
We listen with the various depths of our being, but our listening is always with a 
preconception or from a particular point of view. We do not listen simply; there is always 
the intervening screen of our own thoughts, conclusions, and prejudices...To listen there 
must be an inward quietness, a freedom from the strain of acquiring, a relaxed attention. 
This alert yet passive state is able to hear what is beyond the verbal conclusion. Words 
confuse; they are only the outward means of communication; but to commune beyond the 
noise of words, there must be in listening an alert passivity. Those who love may listen; 
but it is extremely rare to find a listener. Most of us are after results, achieving goals; we 
are forever overcoming and conquering, and so there is no listening. It is only in listening 
that one hears the song of the words.
Jiddu Krishnamurti 

Some more comments:
Anand
“Amazing post Attimber - your observations about the foundations for human thought and how to orient them with deeper understanding, amazing!”

Mathew Chacko 
“Your posts open different dimensions to simple aspects like behavior, fear, ...
I am sure many more are on the way. Thanks for sharing and look forward to your insights on many more fundamental topics that I hope will be implemented as well 🙏”

My response
I am glad that some of you find my posts meaningful. It kindles the memory for some, gives ideas to some, opens the eyes for some. 
Mathew implementation is not in my hands unfortunately. The younger persons should take it forward. My only hope for several decades was that some institution will aspire to rise to the  IISc level. I tried for decades seriously .But Most leaders felt diffident , found excuses and said that it can't happen and can't be done. Only recently I came across a HoD in Reva university who showed interest . SDM dharwad had some inclinations and interest but didn't take it further. 
I have not just given lectures in colleges and universities,  but also observed them and interacted with hundreds of universities, colleges and NITs and found huge walls of resistance. Let me quote an example. When I told a simple thing on the curriculum that the engineering syllabus is stagnant for 50 years despite new courses and disciplines being regularly added , the response from a professor shocked me. He said the syllabus has stood the test of time and so there is no need to change it. Even now  the data structures , operating systems and data bases courses contain  the same aspects that I taught in the seventies and eighties . 
While I have hundreds of encounters in hundreds of institutions , let me recount a few. 
I saw Prof Nityanandan taking TCE Madurai to a research culture. He started research activities there. Then I interacted with Prof Srinivasan a lot. Later, I had interactions with Abhaykumar and Raja of TCE and both showed a lot of interest. I gave a number of lectures . But while management support was easy to get, senior faculty lacked interest and motivation. It was a hard ask. 
I recall my friend KA Krishnamurthy , principal at MCE Hassan and SSIT Tumkur, listened to me a lot and was a good researcher , but again the story was the same. He had struggles in his colleges. I had a long interaction with PESCE Mandya with both Sridhar and Ravindra as principals. We did achieve a few things there with their cooperation. Teaching processes were improved. Research culture was initiated thanks to TEQIP.The student project works were transformed to a higher level with holistic interdisciplinary approaches. They showed a lot of enthusiasm to go for patents. 
Even a good institution like BVB Hubli with Prof Shetter as principal and BV Desai as registrar  had a problem. When I told the faculty that they should look for engineering in the large and computer students should write programs with 50000 lines of code, the response was total disbelief. So they shun me now. 
Well I can go on with many incidents of  my partly  successful efforts to improve our institutions. But the few gives an idea about the difficulties encountered by me. 
I found the reasons for my partial successes.
1.Most faculty had a totally limited inward look and understanding. 
2.They are happy with college and university and don't have an urge to look beyond and do better. 
3. They had commitment to what they taught and were satisfied with that. No other goals. 
4. Excuse was another reason not to do any new experiments , not to change course curriculum and not to do research until forced to do something. 
Dependence on higher authority is high . Every initiative should come from the top. That is a big problem with us. 
Lack of initiative. I used to say that Most Indians retire at the age of 30 years mentally if not physically. This is a disease. Startups changed this Indian Ness.
Most importantly,  fear of losing jobs, promotions , and perks was an important reason. This colonial mindset needs to go. Institutions don't have a nice, friendly, communicative , fearless working environment. 
What I said applies to industries also. The 21st century has given a wakeup call. Let us heed to it. 
Be agile, be prepared for changes, accept changes, and adapt fast for survival as a human thinking person. 
Greetings
09/06/25, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 739
“Assess yourself without blaming and self-hate. Blaming only leads to being defensive, which will bring out your ego and pride.
 Perform relaxation breathing if you begin feeling defensive and self-hating.
 Affirmative statements as you embark towards change will always help.
 A good laugh will make acceptance of your weakness, which is unreflective thinking, easier.”
Christ Lewis 

More comments
Mrs Rukmani Anantharaman
“Dear Anna,
Namaskarams.
Your recent posts about your early experiences at IISC and the ambience of Bangalore are deeply engrossing.Your vivid description of  the various aspects of the Bangalore of yesteryears, such as the climate, transport, interconnectivity, language, diverse population, culture. food etc etc makes me feel as though I am  reading a novel by the famous tamil author 'Kalki', His skillful narration of historical events integrated local customs,traditions and landscapes ,making the story hugely enjoyable and intellectually stimulating and transported one to those early times in history. Your multi dimensional approach too has the same influence on the reader.
I am also reminded of our visit to your place at Malleswaram when we were young.I was fascinated by the beautiful 'garden city', it's cool climate, the broad roads under the canopy of the tree branches and the grogeous gulmohar flowers in full bloom. However, I was sad to see the sea change in the city during my recent visits. The price we are paying for the boom in the IT sector!
Thanks for your daily posts which are both interesting and informative.
Namaskarams.”
My response 
Thanks.
It is good to read your comments. I am glad about your memories of the old Bangalore.  
It makes me ponder over an important question - what is life about? There are hundreds of answers to this question. 
I will look at different aspects of this in subsequent posts. 
I want to give one relevant answer here. 
Life is about small pleasures and long memories. 
What you wrote talks about these small pleasures. 
Most people don't understand the important role of small pleasures in our life. Our survival and daily life is sweetened by many small and big pleasures. You see a rose blooming in the garden. You feel happy. You feel the rain falling and are happy. 
So hundreds of small pleasures make up the happiness in  our life. I remember our grandmother saying at the end of a day that everything went off smoothly. And you should see the great relief in her eyes when she is through with a function . She used to say ,” thank God everything went off well without a hitch. “
What is important is to remember these small pleasures regularly . That is nostalgia. Most of us revisit our school life, hostel life , and family life with happiness. There are some who don't understand this . They ignore these small pleasures. They worry all the time. 
Small pleasures are easy . A nice lunch gives us small pressure. Appreciation from elders gives us pleasure. We should remember them so that life becomes joyful. 
Even reading serials like washingtonil thirumanam and books gives us pleasure. 
I get a great pleasure reading PG Wodehouse. I get a lot of pleasure when I answer a tough question in a class or seminar, when past  students remember my teaching after several years , when you see a friend  and both  express joy , when I  talk to my  children and relatives , when I hear the voice of my grandsons etc- i get endless small pleasures of these kinds. I had hundreds of encounters with my past students in airports, hotels , and even tourist places like Niagara falls. They reminise their experiences with me and that gives me great joy. . All my encounters with my past students are memorable. 
I get not a small but a great pleasure when I counsel a young high schooler on the future paths and directions. 
Definitely we got bigger joys while getting admissions, and jobs, and getting a child, getting children through graduation etc. 
Life is full of joys and some pains. 
How many of us reflect on this?
Thanks
Greetings
Dks
10/06/25, 4:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 740
“Listening itself is a complete act; the very act of listening brings its own freedom. But are you really concerned with listening, or with altering the turmoil within? If you would listen, sir, in the sense of being aware of your conflicts and contradictions without forcing them into any particular pattern of thought, perhaps they might altogether cease. You see, we are constantly trying to be this or that, to achieve a particular state, to capture one kind of experience and avoid another, so the mind is everlastingly occupied with something; it is never still to listen to the noise of its own struggles and pains. Be simple...and don’t try to become something or to capture some experience.”
Jiddu Krishnamurti 

Dr Babu also confirms the lack of motivation and planning in our colleges. 
Let me sum up again for clarity. 
We have some excellent educational institutions, mostly funded by the central government.  But BITS Pilani, TISS, MIDS ,TAPMI , XLRI, VIT, SRM, and many colleges in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune were good ones with private management. Many state government colleges have poor quality consciousness.so it is not correct to say private colleges are bad and government colleges are good. There are a lot of bad apples. 
Why are the colleges bad? Managements don't spend money. Faculty find excuses for not looking forward. Syllabus is dated. 
The most important reason is fear. Most managements and colleges don't have any governance mechanism. So no faculty take responsibility in improving the institution . A small push will get wonders. We don't do that push. We stay where we are - stagnant. 
Another reason is the frog in the well thinking . Futuristic vision is lacking. National ranking is useful. The magazine's rankings are a big fraud. 
Most faculty retire mentally by the age of 35 years.
But students are not bad. More than 50% can learn 20% more than the curriculum. We need to create opportunities for extra learning. Most students learnt programming, databases from private tutorial institutions in the 70s and 80s. 
Around 20% of students in engineering colleges get distinctions and get jobs and grow up well. We miss this. So there are many silver lines in the sky. Let us use them. 
We need a strong and regular training on motivation, thinking, and concepts of learning to the faculty.
Many schools experiment alternate approaches. But they are too small. We need thousands of schools looking at alternate ways of teaching.
NEP is a good approach to move forward. But politics is destroying the good points. 
That Closes our discussion on fear and its impacts .


Let me return to our main topic IISc and Bangalore in the 1965 period. 
I liked the lectures by faculty and also by visiting experts. I liked our interstate and interlanguage discussions in the department with my classmates and in the hostel and mess. I visited the library to browse and read journals and books. I borrowed books from Ranade library of gymkhana. 
But towards the end of 1965, I saw some big changes in the Indian situation. War with Pakistan started and the news was not good. Indian army was ill prepared for the war. We had a weak government in the centre . It was an interim government headed by Lal Bahadur Shastri. The old guard in congress headed by Kamaraj, Nijalingappa etc tried to control the government . Economy was in bad shape. Our foreign exchange was in a precarious situation. 
I saw poverty and scarcity during the war time and independence period - 1940 to 1950. The situation in 1966 was similar. This continued till 1977 during the next regime of Indira Gandhi. 
The war resulted in scarcity of food grains. There was a scarcity of rice. So the mess gave us a limited quantity of rice - two cups. Tuesdays were declared as  no dinner days. You can't get dinner even in hotels and trains. These were government instructions to be obeyed by all. USSR intervened and negotiated peace between India and Pak  with an agreement known as the Tashkent agreement. Shastri died in Tashkent under unexplainable circumstances. The country quickly moved from a stable government to chaos. Fortunately we survived as wheat production went up. 
1966 saw changes in IISc  and in me also. 
Our mess was overcrowded and and provided one kind of meal only. So it was decided to set up another mess - called B mess. Most Telugus migrated to that mess hoping to convert it into an Andhra mess. About 150 people joined that mess. I continued with A mess. Our mess bill went up by about 20% due to this split. The only difference between the two messes was on vegetables - A mess used pumpkins and B mess potatoes. The breakfast menu was changed - now no  idly , but uthappam and masala Dosa continued as in A mess. 
Since the hostel was crowded and that in turn restricted our intake , the institute decided to construct two new blocks - M and N and an apartment block for married research students. Similarly the institute started the construction of the gymkhana building on the opposite side of the road after the Porcelain factory. As I said before we started a coffee place serving coffee, the first one in the campus. From 1966 till date , if something is a steady activity it is the coffee shop appearing in different appearances but being there always. 
More trees were planted in the institute. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
11/06/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 741
“Evaluate your weaknesses and strengths in thinking. The following are questions you might ask yourself.
 What was on my mind today? Did negative thoughts disturb me today?
 Did I figure anything out today?
 When did I do my best thinking today?
 When did I do my worst?
 Have I done something beneficial to my goals today?
 If I had a chance to repeat the day, what would I do differently? Why?
 If every day was lived in this manner for a year, will something be accomplished at the end of the year?”
Christ Lewis

My life changed in 1966. From a student, I got transformed into a researcher. I was still a student studying in the  second year ME .  I was a keen observer of academic processes , activities and teaching methods and kept thinking about them and asking the question - why?I analysed the teaching processes and liked many things like
1.evaluation - continuous, instructor dependent , experimented like opening book exams , - instructor is supreme policy.
2.deep analytical knowledge of the faculty teaching the courses and depth of learning.
3.being kept busy throughout the semester with tests, assignments, term papers.
4. Term papers induce us to look deep into a topic, look for current developments , put together and write a long review. We learnt a lot with this approach. In the second semester - Jan to April 1966- i did a course with Prof KS Prabhu on instrumentation. We had to write a term paper by choosing a modern topic, selecting references , reading the papers, writing abstraction and putting them together. I took up an emerging topic - digital transducers. Even digital computers were emerging then. It was an audacious decision on my part. The topic was unknown . So I entered untested waters, put in more than 60 hours in reading more than 25 papers and writing their abstract . I classified and grouped the subtopics. Then I put these together  into a complete review. If we had computing surveys then, I could have published it. I submitted. When Prof Prabhu returned the term papers, he retained mine saying it will help his course in the coming years. He also praised my efforts and my review. I was literally on the moon that day. This episode taught me several things. If there is a will ,there is a way . It boosted my confidence. It excited me to traverse new areas. It removed my fear of unknowns. It built my writing skills. This opened my eyes to research. I followed this approach of term paper in all my courses. Till this time ,I wasn't thinking of research as an option. From then on it played a significant part in my job selection. 
5. Understanding of topics was good except the field theory course. 
6. I learnt time management as a young boy from my uncle while assisting him in conducting two major public functions. Later I created a time schedule for my studies. Here at IISc,  I saw its enforcement by instructors.  
Some drawbacks seen by me in the  teaching process were 
1.Most teachers went by text book. The why aspect was not explained. For example, the power systems analysis course didn't tell us the reason - what the purpose is in doing the short circuit studies. The course didn't talk about loadflows, not even a hint. It was a fortunate circumstance that i read papers about load flow and it became my work for research and publications from 1966 onwards.
2.Most teaching emphasized mathematical modeling and problem solving ignoring the physics of the problem. It was difficult for some students to understand and comprehend. But there were a lot of good books available in the library so that interested students could clarify their doubts and increase their knowledgebase. 
3.While most teachers were sincere , regular for their lectures and came prepared , there was a small minority who were good researchers but unfortunately were afraid of lecturing.  They skipped classes. 
By and large , the teaching processes were good , motivational and increased one's thinking and absorption capabilities. This is something I didn't see in most Indian institutions.  
 Greetings
Dks
12/06/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 742
“After all, you only learn when you give your whole being to something. When you give your whole being to mathematics, you learn; but when you are in a state of contradiction, when you do not want to learn but are forced to learn, then it becomes merely a process of accumulation. To learn is like reading a novel with innumerable characters; it requires your full attention, not contradictory attention. If you want to learn about a leaf—a leaf of the spring or a leaf of the summer—you must really look at it, see the symmetry of it, the texture of it, the quality of the living leaf. There is beauty, there is vigor, there is vitality in a single leaf. So to learn about the leaf, the flower, the cloud, the sunset, or a human being, you must look with all intensity.”
Jiddu Krishnamurti 

I wasn't thinking of research as a career option till the end of 1965. The term paper I wrote in Jan- may 1966 gave me a lot of confidence and a thrill about research. I enjoyed that kind of activity. Further, I developed my methods for doing research- literature search in a directed manner, grasping a paper and not just copying it, finding the essence of the paper etc. Also i realised that i have to build a strong work culture - studying for hours with deep concentration and with rest pauses. This work culture is an essential part of research. Then I learnt to question - what and why . I developed all these qualities  due to the great research ambience and journals at IISc. 
I had already realised that  industry jobs were routine based on my experiences at Easun for one year. I didn't like routine jobs and found them boring. Also , industry jobs don't allow you to think and do things differently. You lose freedom and follow an established procedure. Actually ,Mr S Balasubramanian,  my chief engineer in Easun was a curious and innovative person . He was thinking about studying the effect of wind on transformer temperature rise. I got involved in the design and experimentation of a different type of meter. That was for a month . Otherwise my remaining 11 months in the factory were boring. To spend time, I did odd jobs like designing a new substation- not an easy one for a novice with no idea of design, participating in an exhibition etc. I did a new thing - built a detailed assets register of all equipment in the factory. That was a period when the concept of asset management was not known and I a fresher from college did it singly without any support.   But no understanding and appreciation came from others. So i rejected industry jobs though most seniors got jobs with Tata electric company.  I was moving towards a research career. 
A second booster happened during this period . We were supposed to identify a project area / topic and select a faculty to guide the project. We should complete the selection by April 1966 so that we can start work in the summer vacation. I was thinking about the project work. I met Prof HNR our head and he suggested that I meet Dr Dharma Rao as he has a good problem for the project. As per his advice, I met Dr Dharma Rao. He has worked on control theory applications to power systems. He didn't teach any course. He gave me a paper on control systems stability using the Lyapunov model , asked me  to read it and suggested that I should apply that method for power systems. At that time, I didn't have any idea about stability or power system stability. That course was scheduled for the second year of ME. So I started attending Dr MD  Srinath's course on control systems as an audit course outside my curriculum. 
While I was busy with my term paper research which I took seriously, I took this challenge seriously and started learning about control systems stability . Both were going on simultaneously along with my course work.The department had a very strong research base in control systems.So  I talked to Dr Deekshatulu also . I was getting knowledge on stability from a control systems point of view, not from power systems point of view. 
I worked hard  on the  project throughout the summer vacation - a period of three months from May to July end with one month of vacation spent at katpadi where my parents moved in at that time. I stopped going to the village now .  
I completed the project by summer's end . By this time , I got some ideas about computers . I knew about computers while doing my BE. I visited the engineering college in Guindy in 1964 and saw the IBM 1620 used for data processing mostly. Railways also was thinking of introducing computers and my cousin Subramanian told me about it in 1964. I had read about computers . But I got a better idea in 1966 after reading many books on computers at IISc library. I wanted to work on computers and look at a new area that none was working in India.  
Let me continue in the next post my greatest transformation into computer research.
Greetings
Dks
13/06/25, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 743
“Vātsyāyana’s commentary: When an object is comprehended through a knowledge source (pramāṇa), it becomes possible to engage in successful goal-directed activity. Thus, a knowledge source is useful (arthavat). Without a knowledge source, there would be no effective cognition of an  obj ect. Without such cognition, there would be no  successful action. (Commentary 1.1.1) “
Nyaya shastra 

As told in this sutra , I found my goal in life - to be a researcher. I also got an area for long term research - computer science. As the first step told in the sutra is to find a good and true knowledge source. I found the best in India at IISc.  This source is not just a great library with lakhs of books and journals ,but also a great intellectual ambience for learning and research. In  the next step  I moved towards using the source effectively. 
I should confess here. When I write about the happenings during this period , it looks like it was a well planned and executed set of actions. That is not true. This is a justification after the occurrence of these events. I am writing it as if everything fell in place nicely like in a story. I am writing a story. 
 I didn't plan and didn't know what to do and how to do it. I had no idea about my life. I was a confused person. It was pure serendipity that helped me. Fortuous circumstances came my way and I grabbed the opportunities. I didn't hesitate to talk to the faculty and students . I gathered a lot of information from these discussions. To give you an idea ,I spent a minimum of an hour everyday talking to classmates and hostelmates in the mess and many faculty members like Prof HNR, Prof  Devanathan, Prof AR Vasudevamurthy . I listened to many things happening in the institute and contemplated life in general. So I had a good idea about life , but no concrete plans about my future course. Maybe things were agitating in my subconscious mind and pushing me forward. That consciousness is what is known as Sat, one form of Brahman. I didn't and don't claim to know that consciousness . I believe that it took me on the right path. All that I write now  are my reflections and explanations of my life in 1966..
Let me explain the transformation in me. Two changes happened.
1.I became clear in my mind that I can do research and should get a research oriented  job. 
2.My future  area of activity - computers - was decided at this point. 
So after summer vacation, I met Dr Dharma Rao  and told him that I had completed the project assigned by him in the summer itself. So I wanted  to do another project. He gave me a paper , but he didn't have any idea about the topic or the approach in the paper. The IEEE paper by Ward and Hale opened  my eyes to two areas - computerised problem solving , numerical solution of power systems problems starting with load flow solutions. I got excited about the prospect of work and then started worrying about the feasibility of doing the project.
A run of the mill project will be easy to do with a grade guaranteed. You have no challenges. I had no interest in that. I wanted to take up something new. But this is getting into deep waters without knowing about the water qualities and my capabilities. I had confidence that I could do it. 
But the first hurdle was that  I needed to work on a computer. IISc didn't have a computer then. It acquired one only in 1972. 
I found out that NAL had a computer and they gave us access to their computer. It was a second generation machine - very small compared to today's computers- it operated at millisecond speed and had a 4k word memory. It didn't have a programming language. So I had to write programs with a primitive instruction set.  Actually the machine was an improved version of Alan Turing's design. Travel to NAL wasn't easy. I had to change two buses to go to the main campus of NAL and then  go by NAL bus to their Belur campus . So it took a lot of time - more than two hours one way. Lastly, computer time was charged and I had to pay for it. These are logistics and finance issues . I was yet to get into the actual efforts required for the project - modeling, numerical methods, programming , data.  
I had to manage the logistics issue and spend time on travel. But I couldn't afford the computer hire charges. 
So I talked to Prof HNR about the finance to hire computer time. 
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
14/06/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 744
“Is not the knowledge of words and their meanings acquired without the study of Grammar? Cannot the knowledge of material substances be acquired without logical discussions? Cannot the rituals, practices and ceremonies (i.e., the practical part of religion or Karmakāṇḍa) be known without Mīmāṃsā philosophy (i.e., the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā of Jaimini)? Cannot the frailty and destructibility of material body (and earthly possessions) be realised without the Vedānta philosophy (i.e., the Uttara Mīmāṃsā of Vyāsa, which treats of the eternal verities of the universe)?”
Sukra niti

I didn't realise that my talk with Prof HNR will lead me to another new and developing area - schemes funded by external agencies. At that time it wasn't well known . The central board of irrigation and power , an autonomous  research funding agency of the central government , decided to fund only two academic institutions in the country - Roorkee university and IISc. It funded mostly state electricity boards and water resources departments for research.  The funds were given to three departments in IISc- civil and hydraulics, electrical and high voltage. 
My work came in handy for funding. Only two projects got funds then - one was Prof Parthasarathy , who was a faculty doing PhD at that time and mine, an ME student. I got 10000 rupees, a very big sum . It was Prof HNR who told me about this possibility. I accepted this great offer . The problem of funding was resolved. But IISc rules ,as I told you before, got stricter. We had to get prior approval before spending it. So Prof HNR ,who was unhappy with this new rule of approval before spending, got approval from the registrar for 5000 rupees expenditure so that  I can use computers without monetary restrictions. I got a rupee for each day's travel expenses as a student. It just met my BTS bus charges . 
Still I was extremely lucky.  I was the only ME student to get external funds for my project. No one got this opportunity. Later I got funds from CBIP for my computer and travel expenses during my  PhD period also. I had CBIP sponsorship till 1973 . My association with CBIP was a memorable one. 
I visited NAL and met Mr Janardhan and Mr Panchapakesan in the computer centre. They became friendly,  but my helping were two very nice and helpful people operating the computers, Mr Nagaraja and Mr Ananthakrishna . They gave a manual about the Ferranti Sirius computer , its organization, its registers, memory  etc. It also had an introduction to programming in the computer. It had instructions similar to machine language only . Input is through a paper tape. It had only five punches meaning we could type 32 characters. So we had to use a shift register . All variables started with v - like v1,v2 etc. All these four became my friends for more than a decade. Dr Sankar, the centre head and later my thesis oral examiner was in the UK doing PhD in numerical mathematics with Prof Fox. 
I read the manual, tried to understand programming  and wrote a simple 10 line  program , but it didn't work. I modified the program and after a few modifications it worked. 
Now I worked on the loadflow model based on the paper by Ward and Hale ,  wrote the equations and solved them using an electromechanical calculator to get a feel of the iterative method. 
Then I wrote a program for the load flow model ,  and ran it a couple of times to debug it and finally  got  the correct results. It took a few weeks. I got my first result and was thrilled. This happened in feb1967. I used the remaining two months for experimentation - solving large problems - a realistic 40 node power grid . I tried several new algorithms - it became a numerical algorithms development project. I moved from Gauss Seidel to Newton Raphson method. I suddenly find many researchers abroad working on the solution of load flows. 
All my experiments showed that computational errors, particularly round off errors, affected the solutions for large problems. The computer had a 16bits arithmetic and so round off  errors were high. Convergence was difficult. I tried several convergence criteria and several modifications to the model. 
Based on these,  I wrote a paper for the CBIP annual conference and also a journal paper by June 1967. By then,  Dharma Rao left for a job in Canada.  
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
15/06/25, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 745
“Vātsyāyana inaugurates his commentary by noting a close tie between knowledge sources and successful action. He notes that in veridical cognition, four factors all come  together: the knower, the thing known, the means of knowing, and the knowledge itself. For knowledge to occur, these four must be properly related to each other. Centrally important here is the notion of “usefulness” (arthavat). The term arthavat has a semantic range that includes “effective,” “accurate,” “successful,” “significant,” and “fitting.” To say that a knowledge source is useful means that it serves our purposes because it functions properly in revealing  objects.”
Vatsyayana     Nyaya 

My project work gave me a lot of excitement. I had a lot of difficulties in programming- debugging-, looking at solving a large problem numerically - class room exercises dealt with small sized problems with three or four variables and here I was dealing with a problem of 100 to 200 variables, travel etc . I didn't worry about troubles and went about solving them . So to a large extent ,I was   convinced that research is my cup of tea .
I also understood that research is a quest to reach a goal - the  goal is not clear sometimes, paths  unknown- , and a researcher's job is to discover the path to reach the goal . The path you take may be wrong and you have to retrace the path. The path may have unexpected obstacles. You have to discover a new route to handle the obstacles.
Consider one obstacle that  I encountered: the major problem of errors - computational errors. Later computer designers tried to increase the word length to 32 bits, 64 bits and 128bits etc to reduce this error and help in solving large problems with 1000 variables. But at that time, I had to find a different solution. I tried double length arithmetic .
This area chosen by me for project work was a great learning for me. It was a three way interdisciplinary project - computer based algorithms for problem solving, power systems modeling and analysis, numerical methods for large problems with implications of convergence and errors. 
I knew it was a big challenge , but liked it. At no point in time, I felt like giving it up. The surprising aspect was my evaluation. None understood my work except Prof HNR. But they appreciated my work as a  new work. They didn't see its future potential. That puzzled me. For the next 10 years and afterwards ,computer science went through a fast pace of innovations and discoveries, but many didn't see its potential in India and in IISc.  Even in the mid seventies, the computer society conventions were filled with mostly business users and only a few academics. Still I got the highest mark for my project work and the medal for scoring highest marks in ME. The institute awarded me a medal,  but didn't give me a medal. It was virtual. 
This experience made me firm to get a research job. But there was a dilemma . Where to apply?
I didn't want to apply for a job in Tata Electric . 
Many rank students applied to major schools - universities in the US. I was tempted , but my finances were not sound enough to pay for travel , application fees etc. Even sending applications to a few schools was expensive . So I decided to look for a job in India. 
 So I applied for a post in a newly established research institute at Bhopal by Heavy Electricals and got an offer. 
Prof HNR didn't want to lose me and told me to join for research.  I said that I needed a job to support my family. He said ,” you join as a research student and I will make you a lecturer as soon as a vacancy comes.” He told me that he would  inform Mr Swayambhu that he won't release me to join Bhopal. So I joined the department as a research student  after my ME. 
First there was no gap. My ME scholarship ended on July 31st and the research scholarship started from August 1, 1967. I didn't change my hostel room. The admission process was the same but was easier for me. I had to handover receipts to various places, that's all. I was allotted a place in the big room opposite to the head's room. So HNR used to call me often. I made him my guide. 
I applied for a UGC senior fellowship which was giving a monthly fellowship plus research grants. I got it. So from September first, I became a UGC senior fellow.I had the CBIP grant also available.  So there was no problem for funds for computer work. 
I didn't choose any new topic but worked on loadflows. 
Greetings 
Dks
16/06/25, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 746
Let me pause here and reflect on the above discussion on project work for my ME degree . Is it very important? 
My answer is yes. It reveals some essential qualities for decision making . It clarifies the distinction between information, knowledge, decisions, actions and process. It is a simple problem.
Let me rephrase the question- 
Why and how did I decide on this project topic - a totally new and unknown area?
I want to construct the process followed by me in my mind.
I consider working on the project as action.
This action of implementing a project is initiated by a trigger - requirements for doing a project work. 
The action  was preceded by a decision - topic selection.
Let me define the steps taken by me. 
My data, knowledge ,guiding principles and application comes into play in my thinking and decisioning process.
Step 1. I needed to collect data - topics in areas .
How do I get this- by searching papers in journals.  This is information collection , not knowledge. 
That means I am looking at existing work . 
Step 2:  I apply my knowledge to filter the information and extract the relevant information. Here is my first principle of  knowledge to filter and extract - relevance, usefulness, feasible.
My knowledge is limited- that means my extraction may be not fully knowledgeable.  
Step 3: So I will go to the next step. 
So I talked to the faculty - Prof HNR,Dr Dharma Rao. 
They gave focused topics using their search, filter and knowledge.  
So I get a few better choices
Step 4: Now I use my knowledge and guiding principles to select. I tried to understand the implications by asking the questions
How is the problem - meaningful ,acceptable, technically sound? 
Is the problem recent, relevant?
How does one plan it? Is it doable ? Does it have enough scope ? 
Why this problem? Is it futuristic? Is it multidisciplinary? Is it challenging?
Step5 : I assess the overall situation. 
1.Problem is complex, new ,needs computer , needs lots of learning in new areas.  No one is there to discuss or guide,- that is analysis to identify potential obstacles 
2.my confidence level - can i do it or not. Can I take risks? 
Steps 2,4,5 are analysis and thinking steps - they constitute my knowledge level. Now the distinction between information and knowledge will be clear ,I hope. Knowledge is processed ,usable ,applicable information. Knowledge is a mental process and it leads to action. Let us not be confused about the differences between these three terms. 
I also introduced a fourth term called process. That refers to the steps in arriving at a decision. 
Let me move  to Step 6. I weigh the various factors using some guiding principles. These principles evolve through our learning , and listening to knowledge sources like gurus. You get maximum knowledge not by reading books but by listening to scholars and understanding the implications. 
I used a few principles to decide
1.is it exciting , challenging ? Are the requisite facilities and resources available?
2.can I do it in the time frame ? How good is my confidence level?
3. Will this lead to new knowledge for me and others?
4.Will this be a futuristic one? Does it take me forward?
5.  Is it a mediocre project or a good one or a great one ? Will it satisfy my curiosity? 
Step 7: Arrive at a decision. You may use your knowledge to arrive at a reasonably good decision. 
So we need to act based on a trigger. That involves decisions. So you collect information , process it using your mental facilities to produce a derived , filtered and relevant knowledge,  analyse it to arrive at decisions. The whole thing is a process. Hope it is clear.
Greetings 
Dks
17/06/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 747
‘loneliness is ‘an enduring condition of emotional distress that arises when a person feels estranged from, misunderstood, or rejected by others and/or lacks appropriate social partners for desired activities, particularly activities that provide a sense of social integration and opportunities for emotional intimacy’.
Prof Lars Andersson 
We can now get a clearer understanding of what knowledge is.  
Knowledge is instantaneous processing of information in the mind in a general sense. A simple series of actions we do mentally to convert information to knowledge is
Search and select the information we need for the situation in hand
Filter the information
Get more information
Group and link  the information 
Find the truth of the information 
Reason the information to get the result you want. 
A simple example is 
You are hungry. That is the trigger for action. You go to a restaurant to eat. 
First you list what food items you like.
Next get the menu - items available in the restaurant 
Find the pros and cons of each item
Find the taste component of each item
Find the health aspects of each item
Find the reasonable of cost 
Now you have knowledge about the food items there . So select the items that you want to eat. That is the decision.  It took sometime for you to get the requisite knowledge. 
Remember knowledge is dynamic . 
Actual eating is action.
Knowledge goes by reasoning known facts and acquired facts. 
Wisdom goes beyond facts and rules. It is a much more complex , not a  fully understood processing mechanism. It is a mix of observations, high levels of cognition, discrimination, comparison with standards ,futuristic thinking and intuition. It doesn't come to all. All are not wise in every aspect. Some famous industrialists or people who worked in the industries or politicians  give their advice on every problem facing this country assuming they are wise. We have many such people , we see many in the TV debates. We glorify many. 
Let me see how we generate and use knowledge in general. What are our artifacts ? 
The earlier generations had limited information and used intuition more. 
Intuition was their tool. 
The current senior generation has a lot more global information and uses better reasoning to generate knowledge and arrive at decisions. It is a mix of logic, data, and general reasoning with some amount of intuition.
The Current middle age generation has more information and gets more through crowd sourcing and depends on feedbacks . Most don't believe in intuition. 
All these generations have strong beliefs and almost a near closed mind. 
But the youngest generation - 10 to 20 years old- are open minded, have less beliefs and depend mostly on data . They depend on devices, connectivity, multiple platforms, social networks, social groups, interactions and current data. Their adaptability is high. They are very aware. They learn faster due to a minimal baggage of beliefs.  They seem to know upanishadic ideas better. Intuition has a limited role here. 
The day before yesterday, I had a talk with Mr Srinivasan. He was asking about knowledge and wisdom. So I wanted to  explain both and that is the reason for these two posts - 746 and 747. 
Greetings 
Dks
18/06/25, 5:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 748
“Loneliness is not the state of being alone, then, though it is often mistaken as such. It is a conscious, cognitive feeling of estrangement or social separation from meaningful others; an emotional lack that concerns a person’s place in the world.
Loneliness is entirely subjective.”
Fay Alberti

Let me go back to my IISc days as a research student. As I wrote earlier, I joined in August 1967 and started work. Fortunately, there was no course work requirement. So I didn't have to do any  courses. I had to take a foreign languages course as a requirement.  I had done two years of  German with Dr Klatt, a friendly teacher, during my ME course. So I decided to take a Russian course. Dr Ganeshasundaram was teaching that course. I did Russian for two years. 
The institute  had recruited faculty for English.   We got a professor from Wales, Prof Lewis to teach English. I took this course and spent two years with him. It was a great experience. 

 There  was no need to spend time searching for a problem. My problem was decided.   Such a great relief and saving about a year almost. I saw many students spending a year in search of a problem to work on. But I had a problem identified by me based on my ME project- computer methods and optimization for power systems. So problem search, the first step in research was over. 

The second step was a literature survey . I had done quite a bit and knew most papers - not many were there at that time . My important task - it is for all researchers - is to know what is happening in the world in most institutions in the area of load flows and later optimization. This is crucial , because we may reinvent the wheel. I had many disappointments due to this, some major. For example ,I submitted a paper to IEEE and it was rejected  . But later a similar one by Y Wallach was published. This demotivated me from publishing.

I was discovering research methodology slowly in many steps . 
The first question I posed to myself was:
Should I go deeper or broader?
It is a major aspect with both researchers and reviewers. Some believe that one should be focused and go deeper. Some others believe that expanding the area is better. 
The concept of interdisciplinary work was just picking up at that time. 
The answer is:
Ifelt that Load flows as an area may not open up more research opportunities.  
Also Since the topic was new and evolving and facilities were not good, I decided to expand my area. 
I enlarged the scope of my ME project and focused more on numerical methods, programming, optimization,  and most importantly computerization . That meant that my focus was not so much on power systems but I decided to focus on  computerization. 
This opened up a new area and more opportunities for problems for research.

The next step ,question 2 , is
What is the current state of the overall areas?
I will discuss this in three areas - power, computers,  programming and numerical methods. 
Let me start with power systems. It was not viewed as a system. Even optimal control researchers simplified it. Linearization was the focus. Most power engineers simplified the grid, aggregated generation and loads by ignoring minor load nodes and used manual approaches. Only the AC network analyser did a decent and accurate job. Otherwise most work was on devices- generators,  transformers, etc, transmission, lines, voltages, circuitbreakers , etc. The only analysis done was on short circuits to determine current ratings for circuit 
breakers with a highly simplified grid . 
 The concept of a system was conceived by some researchers from 1934 onwards. Power systems is the only area which created a systems view of an interconnected system with hundreds of load points and many generators. This was the first modeling of a large system attempted in engineering and science disciplines . Only IISc had a full ME power systems course at a time when most institutions including IITs were focusing on electrical machines. Roorkee taught more on components,  protection, earthing etc but not on a systemic view. We had at IISc three important systems level courses in power systems - power systems analysis, stability and economics all three on modeling and solutions using numerical methods. So we got a better picture of a large system. Even in IISc,  many senior faculty in EE and high voltage departments were working on devices and concepts. 
More in next. 
Greetings 
Dks
19/06/25, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 749
“Vātsyāyana [8.17–9.5]: To follow the etymology of the word, perception (pratyakṣa) is the functioning of each sense faculty (akṣa) upon its own proper (praty) object. . . . 
To follow the etymology of the word, inference (anumāna) is the source (māna) that works after (anu-). Inference normally occurs after perception, giving knowledge about something that possesses an inferential mark by means of knowing the mark.
 To follow the etymology of the word, analogy (upamāna) is the source (māna) that shows proximity (upa-), nearness, as in “A buffalo is like a cow.” Proximity should be understood here as a connection with universals, shared properties.”

We saw the power systems scene in 1967. I felt that it wasn't great. It gave me a lot of research opportunities.
 Let me explain the computer scene next and the computerization scene afterwards. Since  computers form the backbone of my work and computer capabilities put in a lot of limitations in our research work, understanding of the computer scene particularly in India  is important. We need a realistic appraisal here. The main purpose of this understanding is to find ways and methods to solve the limitations like speed , capacity ,wordlength and computational errors and availability of computer time. 
Computers were in the second generation in 1966 and going towards the integrated circuits mode. They had limited memory of 4k to 32k . Magnetic tapes were appearing then. Disk was yet to come. Speeds were in milliseconds range moving towards microseconds . Floating point arithmetic was just being built in. Only by 1970, we got better and faster machines in other countries. 
The Indian scene wasn't bad, surprisingly. TIFR built an indigenous machine in 1963 called TIFRAC , which used vacuum tubes. It was a toy and usage was not easy. But it was a big achievement. I was familiar with this machine. We had discussions about getting this computer to the institute as TIFR didn't want it. It was a usable computer . Similarly, ISI Calcutta and Jadavpur university tried to build a computer . I am not sure about its usability. So there was a very small, but unsustainable nucleus of computer activity in India.  This at a time when Professors at IISc were quibbling about the need for computers and computer research. Only Prof HNR had some understanding. None else in the departments of EE and ECE understood the area of computers and its role. It was a big tragedy. This misunderstanding continued till 1971. So I had no chance of even hoping for a computer to be available in the institute.  
There were three operational computers in India in 1966 . Two were in Bangalore and one in TIFR. I was initially using the Ferranti Sirius computer at NAL and then moved to the Elliot 803 at HAL. When I completed ME ,I was using both these two computers. TIFR had a bigger , powerful and 64 bits computer. So I decided to use TIFR's CDC3600 computer in Bombay. Financial grants were no problem. I had to visit Bombay regularly . The 64 bits world length meant that I didn't worry about errors. 
 Initially I used a simple programming approach - not a language - in the Ferranti machine. Later the programming help was better in Elliot 803. But programming larger programs was difficult. So most people solved small problems. I tried large problems with hundreds of variables for the first time. It led to errors. Still I solved some problems using these computers. 
But I had to learn FORTRAN for the use of the CDC3600 computer in TIFR. So I got a manual and started learning FORTRAN commands and variable definitions , dimensions . But the difficult aspect was using control statements. I learnt within a few days and started writing programs. I can write large programs with dimension facilities. I had to key in programs using punched cards. I did that . Within a week,  I was solving problems in that machine. 
So ,the computer scene in India wasn't bad. All computer centres allowed access to other users. TIFR provided access to all researchers - from IISc, IITs, SINP , Calcutta , and even from universities. Access was good. We used to get several batch runs in the day. 
I preferred doing computer runs at night both at HAL in Bangalore and TIFR ,Bombay.  So I became a nocturnal worker. 
I was using the HAL computer extensively till 1973. I used to book time in the night and visited HAL for two to three days in the week. While going was difficult ,because  I went by two BTS buses and it took close to 1 hour thirty minutes, I used a HAL bus to return in the middle of the night. I used to  complete my lectures during the day and also complete my department duties and then leave in the evening to HAL. I was living in the hostel and I used to miss my night dinner on those days. 
But support was great in all the computer centres. I am grateful to all these organisations for providing me with opportunities for research.  Collaboration and cooperation were great.  IISc didn't support me at all. Prof HNR helped me till 1968 and he moved to Delhi afterwards. I had a mix  of good and difficult times afterwards.
More on computerization next.
Greetings
Dks
20/06/25, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 750
“Knowledge that arises from the connection between a sense faculty and an object is perceptual. There are six kinds of connection between the two: 1. conjunction (connection between a sense faculty and a substance; for example, seeing a pot where the  visual organ contacts the pot there where it is);
2. inherence in what is conjoined (connection between a sense faculty and a property that inheres in a  perceived substance; for example, seeing the color of a pot, the color inhering in the pot that is in contact with the visual organ); 3. inherence in what inheres in what is conjoined (con nection between a sense faculty and a universal that is instantiated in a property inhering in a substance; for example, the smell of sandalwood in general that inheres within a particular trope or instance of san dalwood smell inhering in a piece of sandalwood); 4. inherence (connection that makes auditory perception possible); 5. inherence in what inheres (connection between the auditory faculty and a universal that inheres in a sound; for example, the loudness of loud music); 6. qualifier qualified relation (connection involved in perception of an absence).”
Nyaya sutra

Next, let me look at the next aspect-  computerization. What I mean by computerization is the use of computers to solve major analysis and design problems in engineering disciplines and in Physics . It was not simple or straight forward. It was an evolving process. We need supporting components like numerical methods, devices, simulation etc..   Researchers and developers learnt new ways and new applications of computers everyday. 
The state of  computerization at that time needs an explanation. It was in a primitive state even in the US and UK. Literally, there was no computerization happening to solve large problems. Computerization  was used by academics- mostly physicists and electrical engineers -  to solve simple and small problems using some numerical methods like Gauss Seidel method and numerical solution of differential equations. Pure mathematicians didn't approve computer based solutions. They didn't accept numerical methods as a mechanism to solve problems. Most talked about closed form analytical solutions. Even in the institute, I was loner against most senior faculty who were aghast at numerical methods. Even G Krishna changed only after going to the US and started solving economic dispatch problems in 1969. During 1967, he was against numerical solutions. Discussions are impossible. 
So computerization had opportunities and challenges. I introduced a new course on computational methods in 1970 and another on optimization ,which I taught with GK in 1970 or 71. 
As regards , business data processing , it picked up only after 1970 in India.  This needed two major developments - magnetic tapes and disks and COBOL language. It also needed a new learning process and  a different discipline.  HAL put in a lot of effort in giving identity codes to various inventory items. It was a big exercise.  The unique identifier concept was not understood then and even now. It needed persuasion.   HAL started stores inventory and accounting processing by 1970. 
Most business processing in India started in late seventies.  TCS became the first company to get into this business. Outsourcing also started at that time. Database took another five years - only by 1983 or so. We at IISc struggled with a slow and difficult network model. 
When one tried to tackle large problems, one encountered computational errors leading to wrong results. You can't invert a matrix of bigger size like 20 or more. That is why we moved away from direct solutions to iterative solutions. Fortunately ,the CDC machine helped me till 1973 . Even though IISc got the IBM 360/44 computer in 1971, I used the CDC machine even for a project work done by my student from Atomic energy in 1975. IBM 360 was a  32 bits wordlength machine and CDC3600 had 64bits . That mattered for accuracy and error reduction. We were solving a large eigen value problem and didn't get any of the  roots while using the IBM machine, but got all the roots when we solved it with the same program in CDC3600.  Surprising. 
I think the greatest aid for computerization occurred in 1969 and continued later . That is the development of programming as a separate discipline in computer science distinct from hardware designs and technologies. So two parallel paths started moving forward. Computer science gained a scientific look through formal languages and algorithms as well as it facilitated speedier development of applications. Until 1974 or so IISc didn't accept software as an engineering discipline. 
Next data was treated as a separate entity. Data structures became important. Database appeared later. IFIP played a significant role in these developments. 
But I understood their  impacts  very early  and started introducing these concepts - operating systems and compilers - in my course on computing techniques from 1969 onwards , changed it into a computing systems and devices course later and changed my research focus to operating systems from 1970 onwards- a lot of changes in my life. I should say 1968 to 70 were eventful years in my life . More on it later.
The 1970s saw great developments in computer systems designs and technologies and also on applications. But India got into this stride only by the late 1970s - almost a decade later and didn't grow due to the rigid ,isolationist , anti-US policies of our government of Indira Gandhi and Morarji Desai. We missed several buses in that isolationist environment . Importing computers was difficult. The seventies saw only about ten or twenty computers operating in India.  Even IIT Bombay didn't have a good computer in that period. 
So we have a good abstracted picture of the state of three areas relevant for my research.
Let us look at the next step.
Greetings
Dks
21/06/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 751
“Among these, consider the visual organ: when a colored  object such as a pot is known, the connection has to be con junction, since the organ and the pot are by nature substances. In contrast, with something that is not a substance, such as a color, the connection is inherence in what is conjoined, since colors and the like rest in substances that are in sensory connection when they are perceived.
connection is conjunction in the case of the organs of smell, touch, and taste: conjunction of the organ with things that have smell or another sensible property such as touch or taste. With regard to odors and other properties them selves that inhere in the things that have them, the sensory connection is inherence in the conjoined. And for universals of odor, etc., it is inherence in what inheres in that which  is conjoined. Universals are nested in—they rest in—such individuals. And for sound, it is inherence.”
Nyaya 



Research needs certain qualities like
Concentration in work
Contemplation and serious thinking, constant questioning 
Clarity in thinking and understanding 
Focus
Abstraction capabilities 
Outward looking ,know what others are doing 
Keep uptodate
Futuristic thinking - look forward , look at unknowns .


A recap: The first five  steps we saw are
1.General literature search
2.Problem selection
3.Detailed literature critiques
4.Depth wise or wide or expanded or multidisciplinary approach
5.Create a picture of the current scene in the research area.
Now one is having a reasonable knowledge of the problem area . The next step is gap analysis. This is the starting point to actual research - discovery, solutions,  designs and experimentation.
What is gap analysis ? 
Gap analysis means to find the new and innovative possibilities existing in your research area based on three aspects:
the current scene in your area 
The current lacunae and requirements in your area
The current technological and solution developments as well as possible future improvements . 
The purposes followed by most researchers are
1. To find improvements possible in models, solution methods like simulation , numerical methods
2.To improve accuracy through reducing approximations.  To look for new parameters and study their impacts.  
3.To find new models, new applications, 
4.To overturn theories ,principles,  etc. 
Most choose the first approach in their research. 
Gap analysis is a very deep thinking approach. There is no straight jacketed approach for this activity. It depends on your capability to abstract what you know into a set of points that are important and relevant, mull over them to find holes. Most researchers read a paper and start thinking about what to do next after the work. They ask “ is there something that I can do beyond this paper?”
My gap analysis is discussed not in detail but in brief next.
I found the following broad gaps and opportunities in power systems
There are considerable approximations existing in our studies. Linearization was dominant even though power systems are nonlinear systems. The best example was the economic dispatch problem.So there is a  lot of scope for developing new models for many analysis and optimization and dynamics studies..
Most problems are numerically solved using a lot of simplifications. Computers can improve both models and more accurate solutions.
There are new areas and applications  coming up frequently. For example,  the existing control is both analog and manual, and while load frequency control for a large grid needs faster response, else the load variations will be high. Digital control improves the response and accuracy. Digital control was just developing at this time. So we can build control strategies and define an architecture.  We saw a phenomenal transformation in this area till 1990 improving the performance and reducing operating costs. Actually ,in 1968, two kinds of discussions were happening in US and UK on the control of power systems . The US was moving towards designing online control of power grids. The UK was hesitant and power researchers were quite strong that online direct control is dangerous and they should go for an offline operations guidance model. That is a relevant aspect for discussion today on technology absorption rate.

These gave me opportunities for research and publications and helped me to complete my PhD by 1970. I submitted my thesis in may 1970. Let us look at my travel from 1967 onwards in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
22/06/25, 5:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  752
“A book is written when there is something specific that has to be discovered. The writer doesn’t know what it is, nor where it is, but knows it has to be found. The hunt then begins. The writing begins.”
—Roberto Calasso, The Celestial Hunter

Having prepared myself for research and getting enough leads, I got into my research work and happily it moved smoothly at a good pace. 
But many changes were happening in the department.  Post Tashkent agreement, USSR agreed to set up three advanced  schools in India, one of them in IISc.  The IISc school was to focus on automation.  Here automation didn't mean just control systems alone. It meant the marriage of computers and controls together, a great concept at that time. The idea was great and futuristic. It was conceived as an interdisciplinary school comprising the three departments of EE, ECE and mechanical engineering. It was the first major interdisciplinary focus of Prof Dhawan. He was trying to break the silos concept of departments with rigid ,unbreakable  boundaries. A team led by Prof Dhawan and comprising Prof HNR, Deekshatulu and Nagaraja visited Moscow for discussions and finalization of the plan. It was October 1967. I was just two months into my research work. So I was requested to teach Prof HNRs course on stability. So I started teaching that course- that was my starting of teaching activity on a serious level . I taught about 10 lectures. It was a nice experience and it opened the door of teaching for me. I found that I like teaching. I really loved teaching and I liked the glass board in the class. Remember the students were just one year juniors to me. 
 At that point in time, I was thinking of looking for a job outside and not continuing in the institute,but IISc was very attractive and I didn't want to leave it. So I was in two minds. Even Deekshatulu told me to decide quickly and not to waste precious years in indecision. 
Then an important event occurred. GK resigned as he was going abroad. I was given his tasks in the department . I even corrected his December exam papers . I started teaching his electrical machines course from the Jan 1968 term. I also taught his electrical drawing course. I was still a research student. But there was hope that I would get a faculty job in the department soon. So I concentrated on my research and teaching. As I said earlier, I used to teach in the morning and go in the evening to HAL returning at midnight. It was tough. 
I accepted that workstyle . It was a big change for me. I had very regular habits till then of going to bed by 9: 30 or 10pm and waking up at 6am. That changed. Similarly I missed my dinner for three days in a week. But more importantly my  regular reading of books  got disturbed and reduced. 
I used to borrow many books from IISc library and gymkhana library. I used to read for at least half an hour at bed time, mostly fiction . Both got reduced. Anyway, it didn't worry me. I was confident that I could resume my reading habits later. I was reading the relevant text books to teach my class as well as journal papers .
This concept and practice  of browsing and reading the latest journals every week is a well developed and followed one . I haven't seen this great practice followed elsewhere in other institutions. We were behind by at least a year on the latest research publications. We got current contents and became aware of a paper of relevance to our request and sent requests to the authors. Many authors sent their papers to us. Some wrote my name wrongly. One name given to me by a foreign author - submarine - is still lingering in me. I understood how difficult is my name. From that time, I used to request people to call me DK. Even Prof Dhawan called me DK . Most called me DKS. Subramanian was forgotten.
Greetings 
Dks
22/06/25, 8:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: I was thinking about the discussions.  I feel reaching young faculty is more important to motivate them . I am working  on generating a series of lectures  on thinking bases  general , creative and critical approaches. 
Do you think we can start this as a discussion sessions meeting once in two weeks or one week depending on interest and free time for those interested in it . Western universities allow such free series.
Think about it. 
Dks
23/06/25, 4:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 753
“Maximize your time for critical thinking through the following:
 1.Read an interesting book or feature when you’re feeling idle. 
2.Write down your thoughts about different topics. 
3.Test your brain regularly through quizzes or puzzles. 
4.Practice freethinking or logic-based thinking as you read.”
Christ Lewis

Since there was a vacancy, I got the job as a lecturer in 1968 . My research student tenure was short. Prof MV Hariharan from IIT Bombay and Prof Ganapathy from Warangal were in my selection committee. There were three candidates. I did perform very well. Prof Dhawan knew me better from that time onwards. I met him several times afterwards. I went to Prof HNRs house the next morning after the interview, and was surprised to see both the experts there having breakfast with Prof HNR . I was asked to join. Then HNR told me about my selection. I became a good friend of Hariharan. I knew Ganapathy before. 

As I said, I started teaching several courses. While in 1968, I taught electrical machines and drawing, I moved on to teach computer techniques and non-conventional energy systems . I got deeper into photovoltaic and nuclear energy teaching. I shifted the focus of computer techniques course to digital away from analog. I spent only about 8to 10 lectures on analog computers and 35 hours on digital principles. I used a book written  Burroughs corporation staff  to teach that course in addition to the only book available at that time. 
I defined a few principles for teaching courses. They are
1.explain difficult topics
2.provide practical applications, current scene.
3.introduce something new
4.look at engineering in the large. Go for systemic views . Look at impacts.
5.provide a futuristic scene .
6. Make the students think by asking questions. 
7. Allow for deeper learning through a term paper and a large project.
Also I learnt that teaching a subject gives you an opportunity to learn the subject in depth. Even during my engineering college days, I tried to understand a subject by reading many books . I developed that habit also to know more than what is taught in the class. This was necessary particularly for understanding electrical machines theory and class room teaching was poor. This practice continued over the years. When I was working at Easun in Madras in 1964, I found a good and well written book on oscilloscopes. That helped me to understand oscilloscopes better. I intensified this practice while teaching a course. I strongly believed in the axiom that a teacher should know more than a student. 
I also decided to teach new courses every year, update the curriculum so that my knowledge improves and expands every year. I don't want to be stagnant. I follow this even now . 
I taught at least one new course every year till 1987. My width and depth of knowledge in computer science increased in this manner. I was almost contemporary in many areas of computer science, optimization and power systems. This was useful in my life as I tried to remain current in these areas.
More in next.
Greetings 
Dks
23/06/25, 4:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: This message was deleted
23/06/25, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: This message was deleted
24/06/25, 4:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 754
“Sounds are properties that inhere in ether, ether being the  medium through which sound travels. Sounds that are heard have traveled to the portion of ether in one’s ears, and hence the “connection” in play is the inherence of sound in the ether in one’s ears. We perceive absences by noting that an object in perceptual range (e.g., the floor of a classroom) is qualified by the absence of some object in question (e.g., an elephant). A person knows there’s no elephant in the room because she has looked and would have seen one if it were present. In his opening comments above, Vātsyāyana anticipates this idea by arguing that knowledge of unreal things is based on cognition of real things, coupled with the background notion, “If something were there, I would have noticed it.” Below, Vātsyāyana and Uddyotakara consider the second condition for perceptual knowledge, that it be independent of language.”
Nyaya
  

  1968 was a very eventful year. Prof  Devanathan, Mathematics department,  came back from England after a sabbatical and we got into working together.  I started to look at higher order Newton's method and proved a couple of convergence and order conditions. I used the multi-variable Taylor series approach to represent the given set of algebraic equations. We were trying to find easy ways of representing a multivariate Taylor series. 
I had studied tensors in my machines course using a book by Kron on tensor applications to machines. I also taught tensors using that book. Prof Devanathan was familiar and helped me in using tensors in representing multi variables algebraic equations. I used to spend most mornings with him after my class. I attended Russian and English in the afternoons and went to HAL for my computer work. Somedays,  I used to walk with Devanathan in the evening to his house in Malleswaram . 
The next thing that happened was my interaction with Prof Dhawan on October second. I showed him the poor power connection that was existing at that time in IISc - without any security of circuit breakers . The 11kv supply to the institute came from a rural feeder. This was done by showing him the incoming transformer at the physics department with a fuse box and nothing else. Feeders going from it to departments.  When I told him that if we wanted to isolate the institute's power from KEB, we had to remove the fuse- no switches or circuitbreakers.  He was aghast . So I got involved with the IISc power system from that time till I retired, a long 36 years involvement.  That was a momentous day. We designed a reliable power supply for the institute. I updated our supply to 66kv to meet the increasing load. 

 Then another event happened. Prof AR Vasudevamurthy became the warden of the hostel. He wanted me to become an assistant warden. So I joined as an assistant warden, another burden of work. Handling  work loads was dependent on you. Prof ARV took a lot of interest in improving the systems in the hostel and mess. We had Mr Kuppanna as the hostel superintendent.  I took a keen interest and modernized the kitchen and improved the hostel. Dr Narain Mahishi was the senior assistant warden. We became good friends. I helped him in the various tasks he undertook in the institute like placement and Alumni association.  
I went for steam cooking in the kitchen and abolished cooking using firewood. That reduced the mess bill. I streamlined the mess grocery purchases. The B mess was taken over by north Indian students and now A mess was known as a pumpkin mess and B mess as potato mess. I will recall one incident that happened in the B mess. 
The mess representative introduced idly for breakfast. Immediately,  I got a representation signed by 173 inmates- there were 176 total in that mess- requesting the removal of the representative. I had to resolve it. I told the representative to remove idly from the menu and talked to the students to accept the compromise and continue him as their representative.  It was a major problem. There were many problems . 
I streamlined the rooms allotment  process by creating a correct database of vacant rooms and joined the allotment activity. We avoided a lot of confusion and dissatisfaction. 
In addition to making the kitchen modern and clean, I introduced more reforms. One was the staff structure. All mess and hostel employees were institute employees and not contract workers as in most places. But all employees belong to one class four cadre - head cook to cook to table attendants . I created a structure as head cook, cook, assistant cook, dining hall uncharged, hostel supervisor etc. 
I realised one characteristic of mine which appeared in all my activities and involvements in the institute, KSCST,other institutions, banks, governments etc . That is, I was impatient and wanted to improve systems. I followed this urge to look for problems and implement improvements in all my activities throughout my professional life. I continue this quality today with our FAER activities. We changed the structure this year.
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
25/06/25, 3:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 755
“Avoid being idle by maximizing your time spent for improving critical thinking. Challenge and train your thinking whenever you have a spare time and start building your foundation towards being a critical thinker.”
Christ  Lewis 

Let me discuss further my obsession with improving any activity that I get involved in . 
This urge started in my childhood. This became a habit with me throughout my life . I tried to find bottlenecks, problems, gaps and alternatives in every activity. I had looked at hundreds of activities and tried my best to improve them .Some are major and some are minor.
Let me list a few major ones. 
I changed my way of teaching every year with improvements . 
I started working on the IISc power grid from 1968 to 2004. I made lots of changes . First I moved from one 11kv substation to many. Second, I went for ring mains . I also had many 400v loops.  Third, I went for building level panels. Fourth I went for 66kv. I talked about our load growth reaching a limit and interruptions increasing every day to Prof Ramaseshan, director, in 1983. He didn't bother. When I raised it with Prof CNR Rao in 1985, he agreed and we designed a 66kv by 11kv ring mains. It is working even now. By 1990, I went for an integrated institute wide diesel generating station of 4MW connected to the ring mains. So our interruptions were almost zero.  This was a constant thinking to improve the quality ,availability and reliability of power supply in the institute. 
I used a redundant cluster approach to design a power supply system for JNCASR in 2004. I also redesigned vidhana soudha , Jayadeva , and Vikas soudha power systems. 
I restructured the electrical lab for BE students.
I propagated computer science education in most colleges in the eighties. 
I streamlined administrative procedures and policies in several activities like evaluation of staff at IISc,  extension lecture program,ASTRA administration, DST, government of Karnataka administration  etc. I spent minimum time on administration.  
I spent twenty years implementing corebanking in many banks. There were hurdles to be managed. Innovation was part of the game. 
I pushed curriculum development and modernization in most engineering colleges and universities. 
I assisted in getting autonomy to many engineering colleges in Karnataka under TEQIP. It involved many fights.
I rejuvenated KSCST as its secretary.  
And many more.

How did I get this habit ?

 As I said before, I was following my uncle closely when I was six years old . He was involved in several public activities and conducted two major functions every year- Sri Rama Navami and Sankara Jayanthi.  He constantly improved the processes. The first was streamlining supply chain for groceries, milk, flowers , musicians etc. It wasn't easy. He built a reliable system . I understood the importance of supply chain. I got involved in his activities totally and understood the need for improvements. 
Similarly he improved the accounting system. I learnt about ledgers at that young age. 
Then he wanted transparency in accounting public money. He printed receipts and expenses and distributed it to all. That was a great learning for me - transparency , meticulous working and integrity. 
We sent the prasad by post. He introduced innovations there every year. I observed it and understood the need for improvements. 
Getting addresses of the village people living in many cities was not easy. He created a dynamic and consistent database and I assisted him in maintaining this database. 
So I got this improvement urge from childhood and practiced it throughout my life in all my activities.
This had a multiplier effect and all these helped me in my research and in keeping me uptodate in engineering developments.
Greetings 
Dks
26/06/25, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 756
“You need to reshape your character. Now you will need to choose one intellectual trait that you will strive to improve each month. It may be intellectual perseverance, courage, humility, empathy, or autonomy. Once you have done so, perform the following steps:
  1.Concentrate on how to improve your chosen trait. For example, you may have chosen intellectual humility. 
2.Be aware that denying your mistakes is in fact wrong. 
3.Be aware that ego and arrogance keep one away from educating himself. Own up to your arrogance so you can deal with it. Never think you possess all the knowledge in this world, or thinking that you are as knowledgeable as others.”
Christ Lewis 

I have discussed the importance of the constant urge to improve a process or technology or an activity in my life. Let me look at its importance in our economy and industries. 
Most public sector industries and organizations were just running to maintain the status quo. Some were fighting for survival. Recall how HEC Ranchi, HMT, ITI all failed . Only BEL is surviving. They had a niche business. Even many research organizations had gone stale. The reason is they were living in yesterday's world, they were inward looking. It is not just public sector units but many private sector units also failed . Let me name a few : Kirloskar except DG sets, premier automobiles, Hindustan motors, standard motors, many electrical high voltage cable companies, many computer manufacturing companies like ORG, DCM, Pertech, even Wipro and HCL ,Tatas NELCO and a few more companies,  TVS - ultra business machines,  many software companies like Mafatlal, Birlasoft, kirloskar , agarwals, - the list is a big one- . 
The situation is a mixed one in our education sector - most universities belong to the early 20th century. They don't look at current research areas. Most have failed. Same is the story with arts and science colleges. Fortunately quite a good number of engineering colleges keep pace with the latest developments. Most of them started teaching computer science by the nineties. Now Most of them run degree programs on AI. It is a happy state. But most universities and colleges are not seeing the potential of AI . 

Why did they fail? There are many reasons. 
One is sticking to old technologies. Two is single product focus.  Third and the most important reason is inward looking , not knowing or caring for what is happening outside. This is what made Prof Clayton Christensen coin the term disruptive technologies and innovation. This frog in the well attitude is dangerous.  
TCS, Infosys succeeded very well because they kept up to date with the latest developments in a fast growing IT area through continuous improvements and anticipation of future developments. TCS initiated research in AI about 20 years back and came up with a product called IGNIO. TCS started a cloud business ION quite early. 
Both TCS and Infosys as well as Wipro and HCL concentrated on multiple technologies, multiple sectors, and multiple geographies thereby hedging on obsolescence , loss of markets, and competition. That is how they are in the forefront. Hindustan Lever and ITC went big on diversification. Asian Paints succeeded with successful adaption of digital technologies. 
This urge for continuous improvements and innovation stands between life and death of industries, research institutions, educational institutions, and even defence. The current warfare uses drones and missiles , no foot soldiers.  You saw our country succeeding in operation sindoor  with drones and Brahmos as well as an effective and modern air defence system including S400. They are using the current technologies. Pakistan used old technologies.  We may move to build many iron domes next. Never rest on your laurels.  
So this urge for continuous improvements is considered a big principle of the 21st century.  
But I have been at it for a very long time from 1950 onwards. It was inculcated into me and became a habit.
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
27/06/25, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 757
“It is not the taste of food that one should seek to understand; one should know the one who tastes the food.
 It is not action that one should seek to understand; one should know the one who acts.
 It is not joy and suffering that one should seek to understand; one should know the one who experiences joy and suffering.
 It is not the mind that one should seek to understand; one should know the one who thinks.”
 Kausitaki Upanishad Ch. 3: v. 8.

The need or the urge to improve various aspects in every activity that one is involved in will become an essential requirement for most employees now. Routine office work or factory work which occupied 70 to 80% of the workforce till now will be dead in the coming years. 
 The urge for improvements- another name for continuous innovation-  meant that we  have to develop many other habits from childhood. I developed these habits also. These are
1.thinking habits. I used to contemplate a lot and do it even now. Absorption of new knowledge happens due to contemplation and introspection internally. That strengthens one's mind. That is the important stage of learning, not reading or listening or cramming alone. Learning is not complete without this self analysis. It improves understanding and cognition.  It  is also needed to know the current state of any activity. The transformation in banking needed this habit. I am sure most people have this habit. 
I expect teachers to have this habit. They should introspect about their subject - what am I teaching? Is it correct,relevant, useful, latest or outdated ? Why is this topic? For whom it is intended,? - . They should introspect on what is the future outlook for the subject they are teaching. Then they should introspect on how they are teaching ? What is the problem with their teaching? Are they aware of the understanding or absorption by students? Are they using excuses to cover their shortcomings? What are the ways of improving their teaching?
Then teachers should be concerned about their curriculum. I find most teachers are not concerned about the curriculum. They should ask - does the curriculum give a completeness to the area ? Is it relevant, applicable, modern, ? Will it excite the students?Will it lead to innovation , research ? etc.
Thinking implies two qualities:
1.Accept true facts. Or find the truth of a fact. Don't have emotional or biased thinking. 
2.Discriminate facts to get clarity.
Let me give an example for emotional thinking. Recently kamalahasan said that kannada came from Tamil without any evidence. That led to fights. People are fighting with non truth or non verified fact. I don't think you should accept that statement because it lakhs evidence. 
Biased thinking - extensive biased thinking has been produced by westerners on the origin of Sanskrit again without evidence. They say that Sanskrit came from a hypothetical indo European language . This is without any proof . Similarly, they claim Arya is a race coming from Europe again without evidence or truth. 
Let us not become an automaton. Let us be thinking ,questioning, and reasoning humans.
Let me look at the next mental  aspect in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
28/06/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 758
Sorry to break my discussions. 
Many will remember my uncle Dr Ramakrishnan . He read my posts with a lot of interest and wrote detailed  comments. He was my mother's younger brother.
He passed away in the morning of 27th June 2025 at the ripe age of 97 years.  He was bedridden for a week. It was sad news for me. It left a big void. 
As I was talking about the urge to improve, he had the urge. 
He studied in the village during the pre-independence time upto 8th standard and then went to high school in the neighbouring town - Nanguneri - by a bullock cart along with my father's younger brother , Narayanan.
Unlike most in the village, he wanted to study further in a college. I started my schooling at that time. Also his father passed away at that time. So it was his elder brother and my elder uncle , S . Narayana Sarma who took care of him. He took care of me also.
I used to see him during every vacation. I used to be with him always during those vacations. We used to talk a lot like friends. I still remember Shylock the jew story of the merchant of Venice which he told me at that time. Every time he visited the village, I pestered him to tell me  a story. He was a very jovial person. He was multitalented.  He used to sing well. He used to compose Bhajans to be sung during the Sri Rama Navami time. Both of us were mentored by my elder uncle and respected him a lot, assisting in the various activities conducted by him . 
He was a very hard working and very intelligent as well as a deeply religious person . After completing BSc he was keen on pursuing graduate studies. At that time, there was only one seat available in MSc chemistry at Presidency College Madras for our community. He struggled for nearly four years to get admission in MSc while working as a demonstrator. He got admissions in BHU, Kerala university and Madras university in the same year. He joined each by paying the fees and settled in Madras university. I saw him during the vacation. His hard work was unbelievable.  He used to study from early morning to night non stop except eating times. He was having a high degree of concentration. He used to sit in my paternal house in the village and studied there as there will be peace and quietness and no disturbance.  His work culture was admired by my two cousins ,DR Sundaram and Rajalakshmi,  in whose house he stayed during his MSc days. They remembered him and his MSc days even now. 
Later  he joined the biochemistry department at the medical college in Madurai as a faculty.His urge pushed him to get his hands on research and he pursued his PhD there. I stayed with him in his house during my first year BE at Shenoy Nagar and visited his lab in the medical college on many  occasions. He used to work till late in the night. He conducted a public exhibition with great success. 
 Later he moved to JIPMER, Pondicherry. He continued there till retirement.  He didn't move into the professor's quarters , staying in a small house. My aunt was also a simple, humble and  frugal person despite a brilliant enquiring mind . 
I took my young daughter at 4years of age to get some tests done at JIPMER , based on a useless suggestion by a retired pediatrics professor of JIPMER living in Jayanagar, Bangalore at that time. 
After retirement , he first joined Annamalai University for a few years and then had a long tenure at Sankar Netralaya. 
His research work was not theoretical. He focused on practical applications. 
He always encouraged his younger colleagues to work hard, have goals in life and pursue research. He guided them . He had an opportunity to go to the US to present a research paper. He didn't go,but sent his research collaborator to the US. He believed in nishkama Karma. 
He spent his Later years on mostly religious activities . He was a great scholar ,wrote a number of research papers , popular science articles and religious / spiritual articles. His clarity was remarkable. He became a sthitaprajna.  
Like my elder uncle, he was interested in public work, but he was shy and kept out of many activities. 
He led a simple and frugal life in a small house without a lot of furniture and gadgets. His memory will stay with me. So no goodbye  to him from me. 
I pray for him . Om Shanti.  
Greetings
Dks
29/06/25, 4:31 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 759

Let me continue the important learning of the urge to improve habit. We saw thinking as an essential adjunct to working on continuous improvements. 
We need continuous understanding and improvements of our body and mind also, not just in our profes­sion alone. Our body changes with time . Our habits attack our mind. Our mind gets corrupted and converted with beliefs and opinions . So we need regular reviews. We need to motivate ourselves first by thinking about our body. Self learning through deep contemplation and introspection is the most effective approach for a happy life. 
Let me look at the other habits needed to improve ourselves . 

2. Associated with thinking is the questioning habit. I keep asking why frequently . Actually implicitly everyone asks this question when asked to do something or follow some procedure. People are satisfied if they know the reason why they are doing something. People are not dumb. The questioning habit  is needed to find out problems in the existing activity- what is called problem discovery and what is ignored in our education today -  and possible solutions. This helps in innovation. This leads to gap analysis . 
Further this questioning and consequential discoveries as well as analysis helped me in decision making . I have selected hundreds of technologies and hundreds of products and vendors for a large number of banks, government - both karnataka and india- departments, colleges and universities, and even public sector and private sector industries and have been responsible for hundreds of decisions . I can say that most of my decisions were right . In hind sight, I can say that  I had made only one wrong decision - the selection of the cosoft database for bangalore university. My assumption was disproved as the company failed us.  There were a few cases of vendors not delivering and we had to move to a new vendor. For example ,I selected a new computer company with many promises - Pertech - for the research institute of central silk board and they couldn't do even a  proper service of a printer. The company wound up after a few years. That was an unstable period in the computer industry , many big ones like uptron, Keonics,  pertech ,Zenith etc failing. It was tough. Actually , I spent days in due diligence for the Karnataka government rate contract for two decades in this turbulent period. I could get a correct ERP for many organizations like Jindal Vijayanagar and Karle after a lot of questioning and ascertaining the truth about their statements. . Also I could avoid the possibility of poor selections in many organizations like the shipping ministry. I had bitter fights in many cases like in my CSA department, KSCST ,KGCC , Bangalore Dairy,  in the selection of computers because of ignorance and vested interests. 
3. Innovation thinking - to look for new solutions.The mahithisindhu program of 1000 schools computerization needed a lot of innovations. 
4. Futuristic outlook. This opened up possibilities of future solutions and longevity of a feasible solution. I looked at IOT for the IISc and JNC power systems before IOT technology matured. The past is important. It gives us experience and helps us in avoiding mistakes. But it is the future that secures you in life. Future knowledge helps you avoid shocks and sudden  surprises . That is essential in life. 
5.flexible and open mind. I can change my beliefs. So I moved forward in my learning and research. There was no fear of unknowns. 
Because of these qualities, I could help many engineering colleges and universities  in the modern curriculum structuring of their courses , and many organizations in their technology transformations in many sectors like power, computers, networking , software, ERP , education . Another contribution from me for a large number of institutions was the human talent selections. It was a tough job, with many mine fields and political interference. I managed it well and most were happy. I have handled many critical cases in IITs,  universities . I am today happy that I could contribute to  the education, industry and government sectors correctly and with satisfaction . Most decisions worked for the organizations ,but not for the vested interests. I assessed the pitfalls apriori.  
I acquired all these additional habits as a bonus . This helped in my research work also. 
Let me discuss in the next post why these habits are important and relevant now. 
Greetings 
Dks
30/06/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 760

There are two reasons why these habits of innovation , thinking, questioning, futuristic look and a changing mind are crucial now. 
One concerns our education system. Today people are saying most higher education is a waste. Our current education system is firmly rooted in the past and totally ignores the future. 
Let me quote
Bill Winters, the Group Chief Executive of Standard Chartered, has openly expressed his belief that his prestigious MBA from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School was "a waste of time." In an interview with Bloomberg, Winters discussed his thoughts on the evolving landscape of business education and what skills truly matter in today's fast-changing business world. His candid remarks have sparked significant conversation around the value of traditional US business schools and whether their offerings remain relevant, particularly in an age dominated by Artificial Intelligence (AI).
Winters questioned the necessity of business degrees, particularly MBAs, in a world where critical thinking, communication, and adaptability are paramount. As the banking titan acknowledged, the traditional business curriculum may not provide the competitive edge it once did, especially as AI continues to transform the way industries function.

Zerodha co-founder Nikhil Kamath recently lit a spark with a provocative statement: “The days of four-year college courses are over. Lifelong learning is the new norm—for everyone.” But according to Stanford expert Robert E. Siegel, as reported by CNBC Make It, that’s merely step one in preparing for the storm AI is bringing to the workforce.
Drawing from the World Economic Forum’s Future of Jobs Report 2025, Kamath’s post quickly gained traction online, highlighting the rise of automation, the decline of traditional jobs, and the urgent need for reskilling. The numbers are stark: by 2030, 92 million jobs are expected to disappear—even as 170 million new ones are created. Yet Kamath warns: only the adaptable will benefit. You can’t rely on what you learned a decade ago, he cautions.
Siegel stresses the need to break out of intellectual echo chambers and connect with diverse peers, especially younger, tech-savvy professionals who often act as a compass for what's next.
 Teachers, you have this great opportunity of mixing with new  younger minds every year. Don't miss it. Listen to them . Understand their ideas . Use them. Apply them. Even school children are great associates. 
Empathy is a key to success today. If machines dominate logic, humans must dominate emotional intelligence. Balance your learning with focus on humanism. Humanism doesn’t change fast . It is random , transformable , has multiple - millions- of shades , suitable for LLMs of a different kind.
Let me add a few more requirements. 
Engineering is an inclusive eco system. We are teaching only some concepts of some aspects of engineering.  We don't look at the transformations of industries, business, health, education, digital economy, governance etc and the multiple impacts. Our education is very narrow ,not holistic. 
Broaden your views and learning. Limit or even kill specialization. Go borderless. Go generalisation with focus and depth . Increase your domains, not restrict them. 
Break rules. AI will follow rules ,so don't worry.
Discuss, don't teach, analyse, think . 
Look futuristic. Be application centric.
Humanise learning. That is very important. 
Embrace change. Embrace unknowns. 
Fear of change is a bigger threat than change itself. Professionals must not only tolerate transformation—they must lead it.
Remember that survival in the AI age demands more than credentials. It requires mindset shifts, systems thinking, and emotional nuance.
Build a flexible, adaptive, curriculum with hundreds of topics , not a fixed set of subjects. Keep adding the topics. Ask why a fixed standard curriculum? Why not an open system - a student chooses what he wants? That makes many if not all to think and analyse and choose topics. IISc had an open ended non examination based system in the beginning ,when it was not offering degrees but a proficiency certificate. 
Encourage self learning . Don't teach. Cambridge allowed students to choose lectures to attend, no borders. 

Please think and ponder on changing our education system from school onwards.
It is needed for the survival of teachers. Indians are resilient and find ways of survival, not the teachers.
The second reason is for our survival in jobs. Routine , stable jobs are gone or going. 
Greetings
Dks
01/07/25, 3:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 761
Let me post some comments received.
Prof Babu
“It is thrilling to read about your starting in teaching and research in IISc.
I recall that during this period I had lunch with you at IISc hostel.
I appreciate to take up challenges and coming out successfully.
Thanks for sharing.
Mahendra Babu”

Mr. Srinivasan , PNB
“Good morning sir.  This post is like the introductory chapter in a  management textbook .  Thank you.”

Dr Anusha , NMAMIT
“Hello Sir,
Thank you for sharing such a thoughtful and insightful note. Your reflections on the importance of continuous improvement  is truly eye opening. The historical context you provided  makes the message even more impactful. I m grateful to learn from your vast experience and will definitely reflect on importance of intellectual growth and staying outward-looking.”

Prof P Raja
Nice and valid thoughts on our system.

Mr Aravind
“Well said Sir "Avoid being idle...." Engaging in purposeful activities that align with your goals and interests is key,”

Prof Vasudev Parvati
Excellent information on the thinking process sir, thank you for resuming this series. 
Vinod Vyasulu quotes Alexander Pope- quite appropriate. 

A Little Learning
by Alexander Pope

 A little learning is a dangerous thing ;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring :
There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again.
Fired at first sight with what the Muse imparts,
In fearless youth we tempt the heights of Arts ;
While from the bounded level of our mind
Short views we take, nor see the lengths behind,
But, more advanced, behold with strange surprise
New distant scenes of endless science rise !
So pleased at first the towering Alps we try,
Mount o’er the vales, and seem to tread the sky ;
The eternal snows appear already past,
And the first clouds and mountains seem the last ;
But those attained, we tremble to survey
The growing labours of the lengthened way ;
The increasing prospect tires our wandering eyes,
Hills peep o’er hills, and Alps on Alps arise “

Let me look at comments on yesterday's post on education and changes needed . 
Dr Nirmal Jain ,TCS
“Excellent DKS. All this makes a lot of sense in today’s world, but to give it a shape is critical. Regards”
My response
I always admired one culture in TCS from 1980 onwards. Most tech staff tried to improve their learning and working activities. They had the urge to improve. That was a great culture I didn't see in most  companies at that time. 
I agree that we need an implementation methodology. First we need to change the existing comfortable fixed mindsets and shock the people to see the future unfolding in front of us. But action is needed. Indians are resilient and thousands of solutions will bloom in the country in the education sector. Already I see hundreds working on AI agents in bangalore itself- some are 15 years old, all are highly excited. So changes will begin from young people. 
R. Kalyanasundaram: my classmate

“Thanks for sharing!
Many US universities have a system for the students to pursue the topics they are interested in. Guha’s  (grandson) friend studied aerospace engineering also music  and economics.  I don’t know whether our universities have this option. But the problem for them is to get good faculty members.
In short, the universities should be like a poly-clinic, so that a student has a choice, not the rigid system in which we studied - Group A,B, C and like-wise”
My response 
That approach is good and that is only the first step. We need to go beyond , travel many more steps to the old IISc model or Cambridge model. Except the top few most universities have a little learning model. 
We need to address many issues:
1.open ended curriculum with a lot of topics. 
2.futuristic thinking - be aware and be ready to accept the changes and adapt ourselves to work on new things. 
3.continuous innovation and agility
4.urge to improve. 
5. Emphasis on humanism. 


“Great analysis!
Something for IT professionals to think about.
I feel we are still a few years away from getting to a point when some AI tool will do our jobs.
These are the views of Aruna d/o Kalyanasundaram , Dallas, USA
( she is in QC of  I T Program)” 
My response
AI is already changing most of the software development, deployment , IT design and operations already. TCS is getting more than 30 to 40% of business from AI. More than half of the six lakhs employees have been trained on AI including agents. All are aware of the need to adapt AI techniques and tools. ChatGPT or Gemini usage is common , but that is a primitive but useful step. 


.
Some very well educated  people didn't understand the  post on education. They say ,’ we can't remove the 4 year degree . Higher education is necessary. ‘ That was only Kamath’s view quoted by me. It alarms us and  alerts teachers that we need to change teaching and curriculum. If I wanted to abolish higher education, I wouldn't  have commented on Cambridge and IISc.  I am sorry my comments are misunderstood. So I am clarifying that. Prof Christensen had written a book on class about twenty years ago making a case for changing our education practices.
 I concluded saying an open ended innovation oriented , futuristic curriculum is the need of the hour. It was misunderstood . 
I also discussed what education should provide and how it should shape students - constant thinking, contemplation, questioning, look beyond , etc. I feel that teachers should change their mindset and future proof themselves. I quoted a Stanford faculty and an MD on that. 
I don't want this message to be missed and hence I am  repeating it . 
Thanks and Greetings
Dks
02/07/25, 5:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 762
Prof Vasudev Parvati has a query
“Sir,  we had some knowledge about your invaluable contributions to the IT infrastructure growth in Indian academia and industry, but the scale you just mentioned is just stupendous! I wonder how you have not got a top Padma award yet!
Also, you have mentioned innovative thinking. Please throw some light on how this can be nurtured in young minds through our education system. Pranams!”

My response 
You have posed the right question.  I had an encounter with a fresh faculty, recently joined in Reva university.  She asked me about “thinking.”  I was taken aback. It was the first time I got into discussions on what the purpose of thinking is. I told her a simple answer
“To know the unknowns. “
But in reality thinking means hundreds of things and has hundreds of reasons , many without reason. 
I was planning to write about this topic. 
But I look for  two prerequisites with our young faculty. Those are the necessary conditions for thinking. 
Flexible mindset- please unlearn. Don't have a rigid mindset. A rigid mindset clouds your understanding ,leads to misunderstanding . That kind of rigidity will reject changes , and will be happy to live in its comfort zone. Further , a rigid mindset is formed by listening to parents, neighbours,  society , teachers, friends and government . So many beliefs may be wrong. So you build a wrong ,untrue database of beliefs . A rigid mindset doesn't allow one to correct the mistakes. That means there is no opportunity for thinking. Once you have fixed set of beliefs, your thinking windows get shrunk into a comfort zone. Your purpose in life becomes to lead a mundane life. You don't want challenges. You lead a timid life- fearful of everything . You want to stay indoors. That is your safe area.  I have seen thousands of teaching people like this. They want an easy life. They shun public service. They lack idealism. They may even lack a helping tendency due to hesitation. I even say that most people retire mentally by the age of 30 . So  the fixed mindset is a big mental hurdle for proper thinking. Making people to move a fixed mindset to a flexible one accepting changes is tough. I had seen faculty teaching microprocessors 8085 even after it was dead for a long time and refusing to believe that fact. I had seen faculty teaching 1980 vintage operating systems while today's OS is totally different . To me this says most don't think . Why do I say this? Because most don't come out of their shell. They don't read books . This means that thinking is not autonomous. You need a purpose. You should push yourself hard to think. 
Motivation - most lack motivation. When I used to select faculty in many institutions - I had looked at thousands of people in this- , I found most didn't have motivation to teach , to learn, to read and to think. Many said that they didn't get industry jobs and so they joined teaching. Most quality improvements were push type not pull type. In IISc,  it is a pull type. A faculty in IISc goes after new research  areas, new projects etc. It is automatic. In other institutions, there was a push by AICTE to make faculty go for PhD. Pull didn't exist. When I talked to many REC faculty, in the pre NIT days, I found they were comfortable teaching a known subject and didn't bother about learning new areas. They defended their approach of sticking to the known subjects. They had no motivation to learn a new area like computers. They were against research. It was shocking for me. To some extent ,in the nineties, private colleges moved to new areas like computers and IT and forced their faculty to learn and teach computer courses.  

The above two are big and important hurdles. Surprisingly, most students don't have the inhibitions and fixed mindsets of their teachers. They love to learn new things, they love experimentation, they want to move towards current technologies and interdisciplinary work. They need guidance. That is missing. If we provide that , things will be bright . I tried this experiment through the FAER Scholar program. With mentorship ,it achieved very good progress. About 2500 students show interest in projects in current technologies. Some colleges support them. 
 I see a small and not insignificant  minority of faculty keen on improving their knowledge. So I focus my discussions towards them and budding young children , not the dead wood. I found, rightly or wrongly, that I can't correct the dead wood. I want to clarify here that age is not a reason for poor motivation. There are thousands of old people who continue on their golden path of reading, learning and thinking - like most of the people reading my posts enthusiastically. I appreciate them and that habit and curiosity.
Let us look at innovation next.
Greetings
Dks
03/07/25, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 763
Before we get into innovation, let us look at our hurdles for innovation.  
The first and biggest problem is our non imagination. At school level children are scolded for imagining. But imagination is crucial for innovation and an anti immigration mindset is not desirable. We have to listen to Einstein on  imagination.  
“Imagination is more important than knowledge. Knowledge is limited; imagination encircles the world.” Einstein. But our schools and colleges have the opposite views. 
How do we resolve this- by story writing sessions. 
So the first step in imagination  is to create simple stories. One can start with retelling ,embellishing or modifying well known stories. 
I liked the ant and grass hopper story - versions- and modernised it.
Ant and grasshopper
Ant was working through summer collecting food. The grasshopper was enjoying the weather lazing around.
The grasshopper told the ant to enjoy life like what it is doing.
Ant said no and continued its food gathering.
Winter came. Ants enjoyed life , ate well and stayed indoors.
The grasshopper was starving.
That is the old story.
Let us modernize or politicalize  the story. 
Politicians got into this. 
Communists cried that it is unfair. They said that the government should feed the grasshoppers. Environmentalists  worried about the extinction of grasshoppers. Activists cried hell.
A good communist felt that ants' food should be confiscated and distributed to all.
The second part 
After some time other communists started shouting that worker ants are exploited. They should get  rest and have a family. Capitalists said ants doing work need incentives.
So they built special cells for ants doing more work and appointed servants to them.
Communists egged on the ants to go on strike.
Since it is summer, no one is bothered.
There was not enough food in winter. Many ants died.
Communists and capitalists started a blame game.
The ant colony got destroyed.
Moral
Poor compartmentalized thinking. No holistic approach. No appreciation. No high thinking. Poor attitude.
Ask questions to write more content. 
What will be the reactions of people in your area to this story ?
Content creation is the focus here, not style or humour.  
You may ask students to look at thousands of such stories and modernized them with societal reactions. Students can create conversations between old world kings and ministers, between politicians etc . There are endless opportunities here. 
Ask them to write the reactions of Romans on the murder of Caesar.
Students can describe a day in the life of their neighbours, the interactions between neighbours,  etc. 
This is a big exercise of writing that will kick start innovative thinking. 
There is another hurdle - constrained straight jacketed thinking. This is again due to our education system. We teach the students that this is the only path, only approach, only solution .
I recall two incidents here. 
One - a child in 3rd or 4th standard was asked to give analogies for phrases like 
As white as
As brave as etc. 
Her mother and I felt that we won't go by text book - as white as snow, as brave as a warrior-, we gave her examples as - as white as milk and as brave as a lion - . Unfortunately the teacher didn't like that and gave her zero marks. 
I told my daughter about binary system when she was learning decimal system , she told her teacher and her teacher scolded her. 
We need to come out of this constrained knowledge and look for alternates. Practical systems work beyond mathematics and don't have a complete model. We need to apply our thinking . That aspect is neglected in our engineering education. More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
04/07/25, 5:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 764
“You don’t get to pick your family, but you can pick your teachers and you can pick your friends and you can pick the music you listen to and you can pick the books you read and you can pick the movies you see.
You are, in fact, a mashup of what you choose to let into your life. You are the sum of your influences.”
Austin  Kleon

How do we build the habit of free , positive unconstrained thinking in students ? That is the next question.
“You are the master of your thoughts, and therefore, the shaper of your life.” 
Allen.    As you thinketh 

It is not easy. But the digital world can help us. 
For a long time people were divided into rulers and ruled . The ruled are the majority with mental slavery. That is more dangerous than physical slavery. No system will help in removing this mental slavery. 
Learning is easy , but unlearning is difficult.  It needs constant practice. 
First we should understand our big enemy is not outside, but inside.
According to Pressman  ,the following is a list of the forces arrayed against us :
1.Resistance (i.e., fear, self-doubt, procrastination, addiction, distraction, timidity, ego and narcissism, self-loathing, perfectionism, etc.)
2.Rational thought
3.Friends and family

activities that most commonly elicit Resistance:
1.The pursuit of any calling in writing, painting, music, film, dance, or any creative art, however marginal or unconventional.
2.The launching of any entrepreneurial venture or enterprise, for profit or otherwise.
3.Any diet or health regimen.
4.Any program of spiritual advancement.
5.Any activity whose aim is the acquisition of chiseled abdominals.
6.Any course or program designed to overcome an unwholesome habit or addiction.
7.Education of every kind.
8.Any act of political, moral, or ethical courage, including the decision to change
for the better some unworthy pattern of thought or conduct in ourselves.
9.The undertaking of any enterprise or endeavor whose aim is to help others.
10.Any act that entails commitment of the heart—the decision to get married, to have a child, to weather a rocky patch in a relationship.
11.The taking of any principled stand in the face of adversity.


 Our understanding of ourselves is poor. We are diffident, thinking we can't do many things. Remember Obama's slogan “can do”. We don't have good confidence levels. We are doubting Thomas's.
Also we are highly emotional people with a lot of fear when doing a new thing. Some don't even travel to other cities.
Self learning is an important activity. Contemplate every activity you did. Review it.  Think how you did it. Criticize it. Find better ways of doing it. Be happy if it went well. Remember to do it better next time. That starts a good approach to thinking.  
Look around and find out how others do that same activity . Identify similarities and differences. That helps to improve yourself. 
Don't believe anything anyone including the teacher says. Question it. Try to prove it false . Accept it afterwards. 
The question is how does a teacher improve free thinking in his or her students. 
The answer is  very difficult.  We need mentors and counselors or psychologists who  can guide the students through regular weekly or daily interactions. It needs a mix of reading , listening and talking to mentors. Lectures won't help very much. Regular practice is the answer. It will be easier if it is done at a very young age. Unfortunately, parents, society and teachers do the opposite today. Education goes in the reverse direction. 
Regarding rational approach, the western system swears by it. But 90% or more of inventions and innovations come through intuitions and not through rational approaches. As I said before, rational approaches constrain students' thinking processes. Rational approaches are good for regular deterministic problem solving and not for problem discovery. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
05/07/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 765
“Aano bhadra krtavo yantu vishwatah" is a Sanskrit mantra from the Rigveda, meaning "Let noble thoughts come to us from all directions" or "May good and noble thoughts come to me from all directions from across the universe". It emphasizes an open and inclusive mindset, encouraging the acceptance of positive and beneficial ideas from various sources. The mantra is a call for wisdom and positive influence from all parts of the world”
I want to complete my discussions on free thoughts and open mind with the above rig vedic suktam. Please appreciate how our ancestors valued openness. This to me overrides all other precepts of learning. 
Sit , relax, calm your mind , listen to all thoughts , analyse , discriminate and find answers. That is self confidence. 
So the first step in this process is to get multiple views. Unfortunately, our education emphasizes a unified view . That is wrong. 
The best example of Education is to argue multiple aspects . 
What happens with engineering education is
It concentrates mostly on engineering principles. It ignores the following:
1.engineering practices
2.engineering applications - very much essential for survival of engineers. Applications are in many sectors- industries, business, trade and commerce, finance, health , agriculture , transport , utilities, security  governance and management, people and domestic sector, defence etc. Most applications are complex and involved . We ignore all these. We live in a well of engineering principles and some processes, not all. 
3.complexity of transformation and usage
4.customer and human issues
5. Impacts on the quality of life.  resources, nature, environment, economy,  society-higher  inequalities, rural urban divide. 
What we ignored is what is required for innovation.  That is our tragedy. 
We need a few courses in engineering 
Social engineering
Engineering practices
Engineering applications in business 
Digital economy
People oriented engineering 
Solutions engineering
AI applications. 
Focus should be on applications for innovations to emerge  in large numbers. Digital transformations have produced big innovations like ecommerce,  mcommerce, quick commerce with many innovations. 
Secondly, social innovations are more widespread than technical innovations. So social knowledge is a must. Current technologies focus on people. So we need to move in that direction. Industrial innovations are mostly AI based. 
Similarly ,solutions are seeing a sea of changes. We find statistical interpretation as an essential aspect of solutions - a shift from mathematics. Digital twins play a big role in understanding online activities. Covid parameters were selected by digital twins. It has a lot of applications in many sectors. Multiple solutions is another accepted fact now.  
Greetings 
Dks
06/07/25, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 766

Let me start with a quote .
Edison said, “Genius is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration.” Why is it that some ideas just stay ideas, other ideas become interesting inventions, while yet other ideas not only become inventions but are considered so innovative that they change how people lead their lives? Edison had the ideas and the work ethic to try to repeatedly fail. In spite of those failures, he ended up with 1,093 patents and created the lightbulb and electricity, the phonograph, and film projectors and motion pictures. He had two focus points - practical applications and usability solving the last mile problem.
These two - applications and usability- are key parameters for innovation along with continuous improvements in processes, customer outreach and satisfaction. Performance factors today have shifted from efficiency ,latency, to agility,  effectiveness, functionalities, scaling for growth and interactive operations - not totally blind automation but responsive automation. 
In order to understand potentials of innovation, we need to have a realistic view of practical systems like industries, power plants, fintech, commerce etc. 
Initially engineering systems in the 18th century were closed systems - energy was produced in house- basically steam-, used in machines and machines drove the end-use devices like steel mills or spinning units . With the introduction of consumer products and with the need for resources and transport, the system opened up. 
In the beginning of the 20th century ,this changed with electricity becoming the main energy source. So engineering looked at multiple types of consumers. So it started looking outward. But engineering education was looking inward. With the adventure of computers , this changed further. Software development depended on users and their needs . The Internet and web changed user dependence  further and deeper. Do we understand that scenario? That is required for innovations to gallop faster. 
Let me look at a broad grouping of systems not necessarily an engineering system , may include banking , utilities etc. 
Every system has four subsystems - a back end - engineering end with technologies , design, architecture and integration - ,
 a front end - an operational end , customer connect , usage
a support end -, an infrastructure support system 
and most importantly a learning and innovations system. Normally we view only the front end and back end . The other two are implied or merged with the backend.
So , the current scenario is that social innovation edges technical innovations aside specially in India. That is unfortunate. We are catching the tail of a tiger all the time . We need to control the tiger by controlling its body. This is true in IT, renewable energy , materials, semiconductors , and many other sectors. 
Technical innovations today focus on AI and convergence of technologies . Don't ignore that. So we identify innovation into four  groups - backend, support end ,learning end  and front-end. The front end focuses on customers. Backend focuses on the overall system architecture, design, configuration , updating and integration with new technologies.  
Let me look at two examples in India - ecommerce and fintech/ mutual funds. 
Ecommerce uses more of social innovation and less of technical innovations. It has poor learning skills for better improvements. It still doesn't use AI or IOT or blockchain to a big extent. Focus is on the front end and not the backend. Backend architecture and integration is not organized for continuous innovation.  
The same is true with most applications in India. The front-end is getting attention . The backend is in firefighting mode. 
Another example is mutual funds management. While the US uses AI extensively for most backend operations, Indians don't use AI very much.
“In the U.S., over 35% of mutual funds are now powered by AI, a stark contrast to just 1% in India. “
Keith ,CEO of investor AI
“. In the U.S., AI is used for market sentiment analysis, stock selection, strategy reinforcement, and even writing research papers. In India, we’re still mostly using AI to enhance backend operations rather than drive front-end investment research, but the direction is promising.”
Keith 
Backend changes get better effectiveness, better long term benefits compared to front end customer activities. Both are important.  
So we have a lot of opportunities for innovation. We need to understand how a system works with multiple consumers and stakeholders. 
Greetings 
Dks
07/07/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 767
Industry is best at the intersection of science and art.
— Edwin Herbert Land
Edwin Land of Polaroid talked about the intersection of the humanities and science. I like that intersection. There's something magical about that place. There are a lot of people innovating, and that's not the main distinction of my career. The reason Apple resonates with people is that there's a deep current of humanity in our innovation. I think great artists and great engineers are similar in that they both have a desire to express themselves. In fact some of the best people working on the original Mac were poets and musicians on the side. In the seventies computers became a way for people to express their creativity. Great artists like Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo were also great art science. Michelangelo knew a lot about how to quarry stone, not just how to be a sculptor.
Steve Jobs

Let us ask what innovation is?
One view is
Innovation is thinking of, and then implementing, a better way of doing things. An innovation doesn't have to be something completely new and different. It can be any sort of incremental improvement. 
Another view is

Innovation is the process of creating something new or improving upon existing ideas, products, services, or processes to generate value or solve problems. It involves introducing novel concepts, methods, or devices that can lead to significant advancements or disruptions in various fields.
Invention is the creation of something entirely new, while innovation is the process of introducing that new thing or improving upon an existing one and making it useful and valuable.
A third view
Innovation isn’t just an idea or a tool. Instead, it’s a process that guides businesses through developing products or services that deliver value to customers in new and novel ways.

Innovation involves challenging the status quo, thinking outside the box, and taking calculated risks to drive progress and achieve breakthrough outcomes. Innovation is driven by a combination of factors, including curiosity, creativity, and the desire for improvement.

Fourth view 
To me,  innovation is the constant urge to improve anything you encounter including yourself , your activities, your job , society in general and to find better solutions. 
Better means better performance, fairness, satisfaction, improved revenue or profits, growing a business , knowing customers etc - hundreds of ways to improve our life, our surroundings , our society, our governance, our ways of living, our happiness, in short many aspects in many sectors - even in our cooking . Today I saw a news item about a Shimoga person making a dairy free millet ice cream. 
I saw several innovations in the food and restaurant sector in Bangalore like  by2 coffee, darshanis, mobile coffee tea supplies, house catering, etc. 
Innovation today means blending two to three areas -
- functional areas  like cooking, travel, stay , manufacturing, sales, supply etc,
- technology areas like mobiles, cloud, social networks, data , Internet and web, etc
-AI area affecting everything ,
-  Management and governance area,
-social area like media , entertainment, news, politics, 
And
-Consumer areas like consumer likes ,wants, satisfaction, behaviour etc. 
So innovation is a process of  mixing and blending changes in various areas and pasting it in a chosen area.  
Innovation needs triggers and thinking. Innovation is against the status quo. It implies change . An innovator  becomes a change generator.
Greetings
Dks
08/07/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 768
“What a piece of worke is a man! How Noble in reason! How infinite in faculty! In forme and mouing
how expresse and admirable! In Action, how like an Angel in apprehension, how like a God!
The beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust?
Man delights not me— nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.’
Shakespeare    Hamlet

Let me pose some basics for innovative thinking. It will be a good way of introducing innovative thinking.
Requirements
We have discussed these in detail. 
1.flexible open change seeking and accepting mindset. Looking out and ahead. 
2. Imaginative , unconstrained thinking
3.Motivation- urge to do something , 
4. Reading, contemplation , observations, questioning habits. 
5.urge to improve. Outward looking. Futuristic thinking.


Important principles for Understanding by us

We discussed these also. 
1.Today's systems are huge, connected , complex, growing and changing. 
2.Today's systems are multidisciplinary and use   several technologies, properly architected and integrated. 
3.Engineering is a unified, inclusive ecosystem consisting of several subsystems of different kinds and each with many components ,features , characteristics and functions. All are equally important and needed to run the system. Even the connections of subsystems and components are important. 

4.Innovation happens everywhere. 
Innovation doesn't happen in labs but in the streets. Innovation doesn't follow or respect principles, theories, procedures, assumptions  and rules. 
Ignore theory and rules and constraints in the beginning . Think with imagination ,not intelligence  to identify improvements. 
5.Observe innovation reality - know what is happening in many businesses, many organizations, industries. You will get plenty of ideas. 
6.Find out why technology absorption is slow. What factors affect technology adaption. 
7.Find out what people want. 
8.Remember innovation is not a plug and play activity. It is a sustained ,iterative process with possibilities of failures. 
All these need a mindset change ,an openness, a freshness in thinking. I go to the extent of saying - don't look at innovation with your learnt knowledge or expertise - like an electrical engineer or computer scientist- , but as a common man with a lot of common sense and good observation power. Learn from the people in the street. 

Characteristics 
1.Look at a big problem. Innovations are not easy in small ,isolated problems. It needs a modern big problem to find hundreds of possibilities. There are hundreds of example systems , businesses, utilities, organizations, health units in front of us.  A view of the whole is needed, not of parts. The whole includes business, technology , education and skills , environment and people. The whole is more sociological and less technical. 
2.Don't look for a universal solution - “one size fits all “theory is gone. 
While a universal solution may not exist, we can modify a solution existing in one industry or services to fit another industry or services. Many components like sensors, IoT, data analysis, control , accounting, finance, management , governance, some professional practices , supply chain have a lot of commonality across many sectors. 
3.We can develop a thinking process to innovate. Innovation can be adhoc or process driven .  Today most innovations occur with an iterative mechanism . 
4.Innovation depends on technologies, businesses, services, society and people and interactions between them. . 
Innovations lead to practical  improvements in design, production and development, operations, processes, business models, services, performance ,profits, growths, sustainability , future proofing etc. 
5.There are thousands of opportunities for innovation. It happens everywhere, including in your home. 
6.Cross cultural innovations are possible.
Innovations happen at the intersections of business, technology ,governance and people/ society. This is important to understand. Don't be a specialist in one area ,but a generalist in many areas. 

Steps for Innovation thinking
Lesson 1: choose a real life example for finding out the improvements . 
Thinking should be based on a concrete reality, not abstract entities. It should  begin  by looking at a practical  example - say a cooperative bank, hospital, a shop, a petrol station, hotel, restaurant,  small industries, service units etc . There are hundreds available in every small town.  Conduct a detailed survey of the unit chosen. Find the problems. Find the unit's goals and gaps . Find out their financial and business models. This opens a world for you. 
Lesson 2:
Discover the overall economic and social scene of the country. It is a good reality learning. It helps you to compare the problems of your unit with the problems in the country . It will build a realistic picture. 
Know why startups are succeeding. Most innovators and startup developers use similar mindset and principles. So understanding startup culture is necessary for innovative work. 
 discover - how that particular industry or unit works, how other units of similar nature work, how other industries work. 
Discover technologies available , their maturity, applicability, etc . Discover vendors. Analyse the technology. 
There are a number of innovations of digital technologies in many sectors. Know about them. 
Look at how banks went for automation with corebanking. Know the totality of that project. Know how ecommerce is evolving . Know how people are becoming digital literate and mobile friendly. 
See how Facebook built a social network for millions with periodic improvements. 
Look at Google searching the world and getting answers.
We see and feel  the impact of UPI and wallets every day in every market place. UPI is a remarkable innovation and it is destructive , removing or reducing the use of cards and cheques.  
Examples such as the above - mcommerce, UPI ,etc excite people and encourage innovative outlooks. 
I have seen hundreds of failures. Look for failures like ERP failing  in many cases, most accounting applications failing in the eighties with  only tally succeeding  , hundreds of computer applications for hospitals, examination systems, admissions, taxes management, government functions,  etc failing  in the eighties, dotcom failures in the late nineties,  branch automation had limited success , even financial inclusion was struggling in the beginning, many food supplying ecommerce units failed initially ,etc. Tatas conducted a dare to fail category in their innovation contest. Each failure led to a better system to be evolved. Study failures in order to avoid pitfalls. There is a large amount of culture and psychology involved in the adaptation of a new practice or new technique or system by any organization. See how our water and power utilities resist innovation even now. See why we are not solving the problems of traffic and garbage in big cities like Bengaluru.  
Understand that today is the day of AI applications and changes. 

Lesson 3:
Using your knowledge and the facts gathered , analyse the chosen unit. 
Create a big list of improvements that can be done, that are done , and that needs to be done. 
Lesson 4:
Start at the End- see what improvements are possible.starting at the end avoids worrying about implementation details. It is a great advantage to set goals. Starting at the end avoids constraints, engineering principles and rationalism. 
Here’s a trick that screenwriters use: work backwards. Begin at the finish. Write down a list of possible innovations.
Lesson 5:
This is the action period. But actions also need thinking. 
Now you are ready for a serious study of the improvements listed and use your principles of engineering to plan the sequence of actions for the improvements listed by you. If you have listed many improvements, prioritise them and shortlist some for further consideration. 

This concludes my response to Parvati's query. Appreciate comments.
Greetings
Dks
09/07/25, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 769
Prof TV Gopal has comments.
“Sir, nice post to read. Industry has a relentless focus on the product. Academics need to build the people even if aspects of the product are showing Engineering. Compromises. I am inclined to think that when science reciprocated academics are best. Your thoughts please. - Dr. T V Gopal, Formerly, Anna University, Chennai, India”

My response
It is going to be a generic explanation. 
There are no generic principles applied universally. Universal theories don't exist though science is looking for them. There will be exceptions. So use viveka to know which principle applies in a particular situation, which doesn’t  ,which rules and axioms are applicable ,which do  not. 
Rules and principles are meant to be  applied carefully and selectively and not indiscriminately. Some even apply wrong rules in some situations. 
So your first statement on industry focusing on product was a 19th and early 20th century theory. By the second half of the 20th century ,it changed. Process became important , products were standard. By the beginning of the 21st century,  customer focus , customer satisfaction, and customer tailored products became the focus. People became important. Now we talk of innovation. 
My important conclusion was that : 
Ignore principles, theory and rules for innovation. My Indian examples for innovation are GD Naidu , the guys who built the idly batter grinder, the guys who invented darshanis , Bombay dabbawalas, etc. All these broke existing practices and came up with an innovative solution. I quoted two big western innovators - Edison and Steve Jobs. Let me clarify that there are thousands of innovators. 
In the early days, most innovations were accidental . Now it is possible to go through an iterative thinking process for innovation. It is reaching millions now. 
I agree with you that academics should build people. It is a very important statement. But do they do so is the question. Unfortunately it is not true. 
At school level , there exist some people focus. But at the level of higher education , people focus is ignored. Our focus is theory , concepts, and class room lectures. Interactions with students  are minimal. We work on the dictum 
Teachers teach , it is upto the students to learn, understand and apply. 
Only our interactions with a few students start at the project work level . 
I disagree with your last statement . 
Kindly recall my statement that rationalism, scientific thinking will help you in knowing the known concepts. It will be a hurdle for innovation.  
Basically, we are human beings who know when to apply what. You use rationalism or science in experimentation, analysis . But you use commonsense in design activities , integration and operations. Practical experiential knowledge doesn't come from science. 
Science based engineering education is good for pure research and detrimental for applied work, innovative thinking and operations. But post 1960 ,the science based engineering education became important and practices and engineering designs were given the go by by the US universities. Revival of engineering practices didn't succeed. We also followed that approach. IISc is a good example of that US theory. Fortunately, theory was useful in looking at large systems. Our focus was more on mathematical modeling, analysis and optimization.  It helped in better understanding and design of large systems. So my advice is that blending theory and practice  is necessary.
 Life is balancing contradictions. I keep saying that even education is a balance of skills, knowledge, theory ,practice ,applications, inclusion and innovation. We focus only on engineering theory . That is not correct. 
We seem to have opposite views. That is fine , good  academic freedom. 
Greetings 
Dks
10/07/25, 4:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 770
Prof Parvati has an additional query
“Thank you very much sir for a veritable roadmap for developing innovative thinking. I would like to push it a bit further and request you to quote, if possible, any example of a school/college/University in India where innovative thinking is  implemented in the curriculum, and it's highlights!
Pranams!”
My response 
A good and relevant query. 
Many schools and management institutions have a design thinking and innovation course. Stanford ,MIT and even Harvard have such courses. Many schools in India and some in Bangalore conduct a course on innovation. Focus is more on design thinking and critical thinking . Innovation is through projects. But a systemic approach was missing. Technology was missing. It was more theory and less output. 
AI generated curriculum is copied below. 
A curriculum for a course on innovation should cover topics ranging from foundational concepts like creativity and design thinking to more advanced areas like open innovation and managing R&D. It should also emphasize practical application through case studies, group assignments, and real-world projects. A good course will balance theoretical knowledge with hands-on experience to foster both an understanding of innovation principles and the ability to apply them. 
Here's a more detailed breakdown of potential curriculum components:
I. Foundational Concepts:
Introduction to Innovation:
Defining innovation, its types (incremental, radical, disruptive), and its importance in various contexts.
Creativity and Idea Generation:
Techniques for brainstorming, lateral thinking, and idea management systems.
Design Thinking:
A human-centered approach to problem-solving, including empathy, ideation, prototyping, and testing.
Innovation Strategy:
Understanding the importance of a clear innovation strategy and how to develop one.
Understanding the Innovation Process:
Exploring the different stages of the innovation process (idea generation, development, implementation, diffusion).
Barriers to Innovation:
Identifying and overcoming obstacles to innovation, both internal and external. 
II. Innovation Management:
R&D Management: Managing research and development activities, including portfolio management and team structures.
Open Innovation: Understanding the principles of open innovation, including collaboration, knowledge sharing, and external partnerships.
Intellectual Property Management: Protecting and leveraging intellectual property in innovation processes.
Innovation Ecosystems: Exploring the broader environment that supports innovation, including funding, infrastructure, and policy.
Measuring Innovation: Developing metrics to track and evaluate innovation performance. 
III. Application and Practice:
Case Studies:
Analyzing successful and failed innovation initiatives across different industries.
Guest Speakers:
Inviting industry experts to share their experiences and insights.
Group Assignments:
Working on collaborative projects that require students to apply learned concepts.
Final Project:
A larger, more in-depth project that allows students to demonstrate their understanding and skills.
Specific Areas of Focus (depending on the course level and target audience):
For Business Students:
Innovation in business models, product development, marketing, and entrepreneurship.
For Technology Students:
Innovation in technology development, product design, and systems integration.
For Social Science Students:
Innovation in social impact, policy, and community development.
For Education Students:
Innovation in curriculum development, teaching methodologies, and learning environments. 
V. Skills Development:
Critical Thinking: Analyzing complex situations and developing creative solutions.
Problem-Solving: Identifying problems, generating solutions, and implementing them.
Communication: Effectively communicating ideas and proposals.
Collaboration: Working effectively in teams and with diverse groups.
Adaptability: Adjusting to changing circumstances and new technologies. 
All the above reveal the following
Institutions are aware of innovation and teach it.
Focus is more management , less on social aspects
Technology based innovations - the largest innovations potential - is ignored mostly . And that led me to devise a curriculum. 
My experiments
Based on my involvements with many organizations and many sectors like IT, governments, business, institutions, industries and banks , I devised a course called as transformations- technology business interactions. 
I conducted the transformation - technology to business - in SDM and you ,Vasudev, conducted it. But I couldn't do justice due to time constraints.
I ran it for about four months and  20 plus lectures at NMAMIT . Dr Anusha conducted it. I told the students to choose an example for the survey. It was a great experience. Thanks to Niranjan and Anusha. 
But I didn't run a full-fledged innovation thinking and development course . I would like to do it and am waiting for an opportunity. 

Thanks for your interest, Vasudev Parvati. 
Greetings
Dks
11/07/25, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 771
Let me return to my life at IISc during 1968. 
I changed my status from that of a research student to that of  a faculty. 
The faculty position meant that I should continue my research for my PhD and should teach courses . The EE department had both a three year post BSc program for  BE and an ME program in two streams. I taught courses for BE and both streams of ME. We didn't have entrance exams for admissions to BE and ME at that time.  We received the applications and tabulated candidates ‘ details in big sheets. It was a laborious process. 
We shortlisted the best students in BSc for an interview for BE admission. We did many iterative direct admissions for ME, the first two or three steps shortlisted top ranking students for direct admissions. The final stage was a list of candidates for an interview. I participated in the tabulation as well as in the discussions for picking the high rank students. We decided to conduct an entrance test for BE admissions in 1969. That was the first time institute conducted entrance tests. Later we conducted our entrance exams for ME and research along with BE. We first conducted the exam in bangalore only and later extended to other cities. Initially, Chennai had the largest number of candidates and I conducted the exam in Chennai twice and in Mumbai once. 
As another duty , we have to guide ME students for project work. I got three students that year. One of them withdrew later. Both students did great work . It was a great start for me in academics in four aspects of education- teaching, research, students projects, students selection. 
The year 1969 saw many changes and involvements for me. 
The first one was in the electrical machines lab. We took charge of running the lab for second year BE EE and ECE students. I felt that a standard set of experiments is not a good way of learning about machines and their load behaviours . It is routine and ritualistic. I wanted to change it. I talked to Prof Joseph about it . He encouraged me to redo the lab experiment. So I restructured the experiments by grouping the experiments to provide deeper learning . So the students studied each type of machine in detail , conducted a few  standard experiments and designed new experiment.  It was my attempt at innovation. 
Also I got permission from Prof HNR to abolish the exam for the lab. It was a big change in mindset. He said that when he studied - He studied in the same department- , there were no formal exams. So he supported my idea. I decided to go by the lab work, designs and assign weight age for each experiment done by a student for sessional marks. We decided to conduct a viva for 15 minutes for each student. I formed a committee and included NV and VVS ,my colleagues, into the viva team. 
The viva was revealing. Students were upset by my changing the old pattern. Now they dreaded the viva. It was no more easy going. Viva is an unknown factor. You don't know what question you get to answer. So they were unhappy. One girl student even cried in the viva. But most did well. We could test their knowledge in a better way by posing to them situations of failures of machines. It was a learning experience for us. 
Greetings
Dks
12/07/25, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 772
Let me continue with the happenings in the academic year  1969 70. 
Then the institute decided to go for a credit system. The institute set up a committee with Prof BS Ramakrishna as a chairman to develop the complete procedures for a new curriculum . By that time, Prof HNR had gone to Delhi as a member of UPSC . So Prof BNN Iyengar became the head and he consulted me on every matter. He trusted me a lot. He consulted me on even serious matters like promotion of faculties. So he nominated me as a member of the committee. So I got fully involved in that . I was a member of the main curriculum committee , in fact the juniormost member, all others being professors and also  its subcommittee which worked out the details of the new proposed curriculum. I had an opportunity to work with both Prof BS Ramakrishna and Prof R Narasimha and Prof AK Rao who was the dean. It was laborious work. The difficult part was convincing most heads and senior faculty to accept the proposals. But Prof Dhawan supported our recommendations. For the first time, we prepared a full scheme of instructions with details of all courses offered.  We had several days of discussions on grading . We decided on a 5 grade system - A,B,C,D,F. We decided on a GPA of 2.2 for pass and 3.2 for distinction. Then we discussed how an instructor decides on grades. In most cases, we can't apply any kind of normal distribution. We decided to set up a grades advisory committee. I was a member of this committee for about 5 years. We had a lot of hilarious incidents happening with faculty grading.
 After a few years, we moved to a 7 point grading system -S,A,B,C,D,E,F. Later E grade was abolished when CNR Rao was the director.  
This was a very valuable experience for me. It made me understand the system trying to cater to students with different capabilities by defining a varying workload and a number of electives. IISc was the first to introduce this flexible system in India. 
It was an innovative reform . It was also an innovative project deciding on many aspects to be done differently. It was pushed by a few senior faculty like Prof Dhawan, Prof Ramakrishna,  Prof Narasimha etc who got their PhDs abroad. Many heads were not comfortable about this. But most seniors supported it. So they went along with it. 
I understood the concepts. I came to know about the grading system followed in most American universities . The most important learnings I got were  :
1.Curriculum development is an extremely important and time consuming activity. 
2.It is integral to teaching . 
3.It is a serious design activity. I found that this aspect was ignored in all universities . It was treated as a copy and paste activity with no serious thought or design work. 
4. It threw up many questions on each component of the system. Since there was an open discussion, many views came out. So I could see many perspectives of a problem while analysing it and solving it. It taught me the need for integration - a seamless run through many processes - course structures, content development, sequencing, schedules, time table, evaluation and grading, advising students for course selections, registration and dropping a course, thresholds for course loads, planning for the full program etc. We built robust mechanisms like a grading committee,  timetable committee, departmental curriculum committee, registration organization, faculty advisors, etc. A lot of it was new and faculty training was required. It also meant  participation by most faculty in the overall process and individual components . Their support is necessary for the success of the project.
5.It is a dynamic activity - we need to have a relook  every year and make changes. It should be a part of academics. Most faculty don't get involved in this. Most don't even understand this. The autonomy given to a few colleges helped them to develop their curriculum. I played a big role in evolving the curriculum in several colleges and universities. I had big fights in many meetings. 
It helped me later in pushing better understanding and implementation of curriculum in many institutions. I did it with a lot of  commitment and passion.  It is also the first major reform project that I participated fully in.
Greetings
Dks
13/07/25, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 773



Let me discuss a general aspect or trend or characteristics that people follow in arguments , discussions or taking decisions- I call this binary thinking. We feel someone is good or bad . A particular  college is good or bad. Hinduism is treated as totally bad because of casteism by a large number of people across the world almost universally and all other aspects of dharma are ignored  .  You divide people as wokists and non-wokists , optimists or pessimists, Luddites or utopians etc. Normally a blind belief is used by a person to arrive at a conclusion. 

  This binary theory uses a dominant aspect of a person or problem or organization or event or situation and ignores all other aspects. I see this single dominance  theory adopted by most. Recently I had a small and inconclusive discussion comparing Sankara and  Ramanuja. Again, it saw this binary theory based on one dominant fact dominated the conclusion-it was based on the inclusivity of  Ramanuja to accept other castes into brahminism. . All other aspects are ignored by us. It is carried by us even in professional decisions, friendships , political decisions etc. Only a very high degree of maturity and viveka will help us in analysing a problem in a holistic , multi dimensional manner to reach a conclusion which is more meaningful and useful. 
This single solution, dominant factor dependence based binary theory is implicitly taught in our education. It is dangerous. Only a small percentage of students come out of this syndrome. But most solution techniques and most assumptions in engineering are based on the binary theory. It is useful to simplify a problem so that it can be solved. A popular modeling concept , linearization is a good example. 

Let me return to my experiences at IISc. 
 I had talked about my hostel experiences. I continued with hostel wardenship till 1971 and quit from that position in 71. 
The hostel wardenship gave me a lot of learnings. I was very fortunate to have that experience at that young age . Even Prof Dhawan mentioned it during my interview for the selection of assistant professors held  around Jan 1973. He appreciated my overall involvement in the IISc activities in addition to academic excellence.  
Let me list a few learnings that I had due to my wardenship.
1.I realised that  understanding, interactions and management of people at various levels  are more important. I had many such  people oriented encounters. 
Prof AR Vasudevamurthy as warden introduced a system of inviting a few professors or senior faculty for lunch. He won't take them for lunch. But we ,myself and Dr Mahishi used to take them to the mess for lunch. These meetings had heated discussions. One senior professor complained about corruption in the office, another argued against his theory. It was interesting to observe these opinions. Prof AK Rao said idly came from Tamilnadu and Prof ARV protested that idly is there in Karnataka also . It is not a Tamilnadu product. I saw sensitivities here. These meetings gave me a tremendous opportunity to meet many seniors and discuss many hostel matters with them. They used to bring the views of their students. It was a good feedback mechanism. Also, it brought me closer to many professors . Prof AK Rao became a good friend. These meetings  were practised for a year and then discontinued.
2.It was Deepavali time. The messes organize a special feast every year for many functions and Deepavali is more special. Normally we had a special lunch with light fruit dinner on those days. One year 1969 or 1970, I don't remember, the B mess representatives wanted a special dinner instead of lunch on diwali day . The employees expressed their unhappiness. My other colleague  , Munjal, supported the dinner proposal and said employees should be happy as they get special food which otherwise they couldn't afford . I argued that celebration with family gives them  greater happiness and I was against the dinner request. It was turned down in the end. This shows the need to understand the psychology of an individual ,as PG Wodehouse's Jeeves says. 
More encounters in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
14/07/25, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 774
I was looking at interactions with people. Let me continue with my interactions with people during my hostel wardenship period.
3. Once , on an institute   council meeting day, the mess had to send food for lunch to the members after the meeting. I asked the assistant registrar for a vehicle to transport the food. But he said that  I should have requested in advance for a vehicle and refused my request . So we didn't send the food. The registrar got panicky and I told him the situation. He was a great diplomat and sent a vehicle immediately and food was sent to avoid embarrassment.  Hostel staff were tense at that time. 
4. I saw a few incidents attacking the ego  of students. Let me narrate one incident. A faculty from Engineering College, Guindy joined IISc for research in civil engineering.  He was a rank student in BE . He registered for courses in the first term. When the results came, he got poor scores. That destroyed him mentally. He became erratic. I talked to Dr TB Subba Rao and we decided to shift him to NIMHANS for treatment. His parents came the next day and abused us . All our explanations were not accepted by them. They took him back to Madras.  Similarly, another student was falling sick often . We both visited his room. It was dirty. So we shifted him to the ward and got the room cleaned. I encountered many such cases and many times,  I and Dr BS Subba Rao, who joined later, used to visit the hostel to check the health situations and conditions. 
5.I didn't agree with halal cutting of animals on the campus. I suggested that I don't want to encourage that practice in the campus, but they can buy such meat from the market. But the mess committee didn't agree with their request. 

6.There were many more incidents like students' unruly behaviours , students’ difficulties , adjustments with language, culture and food habits and poor value systems . I want to talk about what I mean by poor value systems.
7.Many students don't vacate the hostel room after completing their education . They stay unofficially in the hostel even after getting a job in Bangalore . The number was not small, it was in hundreds. 
8.Many students don't inform the hostel office about the guests they get and pay a nominal amount . 
9. But one thing I abhor is that some students left the hostel without paying  the last few months' mess dues. They misused the trust of the institute.  I didn't understand their behaviour.
So we introduced a no dues certificate mandatory for all those leaving the institute  to get an NoC  from mess, hostel, department,  gymkhana etc, to avoid such phenomena.
I had one episode which occurred in the mid eighties when I wasn't in the hostel.  It concerned a TCS associate, a past student of IISc. He was deputed to go abroad, but didn't have his degree certificate from IISc and that was required for visa.  Mr Krishnan, regional manager,TCS requested my help to get his degree certificate. I enquired in the students section for his certificate. I was told that his award hadn't gone to the senate for approval. Further enquiry revealed that he didn't pay his last three months' mess dues. I informed Krishnan about the situation.  Krishnan said he will pay the dues immediately.  I scolded him , and told him that values are more important and I won't be a party to help such mean minded people. 
This learning about different kinds of people was very useful for me in all my activities. I had interactions with thousands of students, faculty, experts, peers, vendors ,sales people, technical staff of many companies ,institutions and organizations.  In later years, I interacted with several people every day. I became more of a people manager. It had a lot of rough and difficult periods. 
Somehow , the concept of people management was not understood in general. We think that only managers need some HR skills. But I think that a holistic understanding of  people ,their behaviour and reactions  is necessary for all of us  to create an empathy, to understand the different  views of others , to know and react to the emotions and behaviours of people, to build good confidence in them, to elicit the required information, take proper  decisions and to negotiate successfully with them. I learnt all these and became a mature people manager successfully navigating difficult paths. 
Greetings
Dks
15/07/25, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 775
Prof Vinod Vyasulu comments on binary thinking:
“DKS, I want to extend one aspect further. I agree with your points on binary thinking. But as one considers different aspects, there is often a need to balance the effects of one against another. In economics, except on ideal conditions, one cannot control both inflation and employment. In power projects as we found in Bedthi, environment effects vs just electricity. That was a complex case. 
A balance has to be sought. In that process, some may focus on aspect A, others on C. There may still be other aspects C, D etc. Different individuals will focus on different aspects, give different weighateges based on their values. This l ads to differences, often, sadly, bitter ones.
You mention that some say Hinduism is bad because of casteism. This is true. Consider Dr Ambedkar, born dalit, who gave caste discrimination high weight as a negative when compared with the concept of equality of all. On this basis of lived experience, he embraced Buddhism. It is the shruti, as you have shown that do not talk of caste as discrimination. But people live by the smriti, especially the Manusmriti and the Yajnavalkya smriti, which discuss caste hierarchies in detail. Until we find a way to rise above these discriminatory practices, there will be genuine reasons to move away from Hinduism as generally practiced. Q  see this inour society today. 
Caste discrimination is not Brahmins looking down on others it is others, from their position in the hierarchy, looking down on those below. It is a festering societal problem.”
My response 
Thanks for highlighting this aspect. 
I consider this binary thinking even by the socalled intellectuals , wokists and politicians as a non desirable, attention diverting mechanism. We all fall for that trick and we start following the binary thinking or dominant factor approach . We may be ignoring many important aspects. We ignored the environment for the economy for a very long time. We used coal and petroleum extensively and indiscriminately for a long time and have a climate crisis today. Traditionally both engineers and economists simplified problem solving and arriving at decisions. The reason is the dependence of most processes on formal mathematics and the consequent limitations of the models. But the mid 20th century looked at multivariate models successfully. So we need to adapt to multifactor thinking and I started thinking and finding the many factors from a situation that should be considered. 

Decision making is definitely a compromise between many factors. There are ways of modeling them with multiplicational weightages assigned to each factor. Penalty factors were used. All engineering problems were complex and we needed to look at many factors - costs, efficiency, reliability, reach,availability, maturity of technologies, ease of use. So the solutions were approximations to handle these factors by balancing them. I started thinking of multifactor thinking and modeling from my PhD work itself. My strong mathematics and use of iteration, computational methods and tensors helped me in my tasks. Computer solutions speeded up this process.  I followed it in many examples I was involved in.
Let me illustrate some of my experiences.  
1.Recall Bedthi hydro projects.   You know how we introduced the environment into the design by taking into account three factors - energy, environment and social displacement . The forest was costed in a better way. It took many decades to cost displacement realistically due to the myopic thinking and resistance  of the powerful. 
2. I did the same thing with rural energy studies by looking at energy, costs, efficiencies, maturity of usage and built a compromise model.  We used vector programming solutions. I developed an integrated energy model for rural areas. Many factors like conservation, focus on renewable, quality matching were built as constraints. That showed a method for taking into account many factors ,not just one dominant factor alone. 
3.We did a more detailed and less approximate model for energy planning for Uttara kannada district. It was the first detailed model which integrated many forms of energy. It focused on three aspects-biomass,  conservation and renewables. We used penalties for the use of nonrenewable energy .
More examples in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
16/07/25, 5:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 776
Let me continue the discussion on multidimensional and multidisciplinary thinking. I consider this topic important and hence more explanations are given.
4. When I encountered frequent powercuts in the late seventies and early eighties, I wanted a reliable supply for IISc.  In 1969 , I moved to multiple 11kv substations at a higher cost ,but security , safety  and reliability were ensured. I built a good, safe, available and reliable power system for the institute. It was a totally new way of thinking and a new approach. Many complained that the cost was high. But I looked at the overall scenario and not just power supply costs. Due to power cuts many experiments were delayed and lots of costly chemicals were lost. In those days , importing chemicals was difficult. So I considered reliability as important along with overall cost reduction. Similarly ,I gave importance to safety.  
So in the early eighties, I decided to move to a 66kv power supply for IISc. I started this request with Prof Ramaseshan. He didn't support my proposal. When I told CNR Rao about it after he became the director, he supported it. I went ahead designing the new system including site selection, capacity , 11kv ring mains, supply to the new supercomputer building , transmission by overhead and underground lines, new jointing techniques etc. But our proposal  met with opposition from inside and outside  . Even the then KEB chairman met Prof CNR Rao and opposed the project. The KEB chairman was my friend and I didn't understand his motivation for opposing this project. 
But I convinced CNR with only one argument- do you want IISc to be one among the 1000s of substations suffering power shutdowns or one among the top 10 getting a reliable supply? He understood and gave me the go ahead signal. We did minimise the costs, but wanted a rugged and reliable system. So the complete design considered multiple factors. There was another decision to be made . The new supercomputer centre building was coming up and they proposed a substation in the basement . I opposed it due to the increased risks of fire. I suggested building  an outdoor substation just outside the building. It increased the cost by rupees six lakhs in the mid eighties.  It was high and I convinced both Prof MN Srinivasan and Prof V Rajaraman. 
I followed the same principles for designing power supplies and distribution for JNCASR, Jayadeva institute of Cardiology and Vidhana soudha. 
I had serious quality doubts about the purchase of a kilometer long 66kv cable bringing power from the KEB supply point to the IISc compound wall. We had a lot of discussions on this and we spent a week at the plant to study the manufacturing processes. Finally, we agreed on buying that lowest cost cable. So L1 is not always my first choice. Quality was my first concern ,but cost was also important. 
5.Recall my Bangalore water supply work. I got objections from KSCST for suggesting dual water distribution- separate high quality potable water and low quality non potable water-  due to costs of piping , but water wastage was ignored. Rain water harvesting suggested by me was not considered. The excom didn't consider conservation as important . It went by costs. 
6.Recall my modeling of a more complex problem - carrying capacity studies for dakshina kannada district. It considered several resources and optimised the location of projects in many areas. It used a lot of user inputs. I spent several months on it.
7. My involvement with computerization in a large number of organizations and banks was successful as I used applicability ,usability , reliability , maturity, legality and dependability  as the criteria for selection, not just costs. It was a well thought out mechanism developed by me to handle these as essential conditions. The two part tender was started by me and later it was made a law. 
If I hadn't done that kind of multifactor analysis and had gone by only the lowest cost for selection of vendors,  my mahithisindhu project wouldn't have succeeded with many powerful sharks looming nearby to grab the money. The project was a big success with multiple factors built into it. I succeeded in using faculty from 20 engineering colleges in it. 
More on this topic and more examples in the next post
Greetings
Dks
17/07/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 777
Let me continue my discussions on the need for multifactor thinking . 
8.In the case of corebanking for the  Indian bank, I rejected iflex because the server used windows OS and it was vulnerable to security breaches. I had to defend it in the board meeting. In the case of banks , data security is vital. Here I looked at long term costs vs short term costs of servers and software. We designed an architecture in stages to improve reliability and minimise data losses. We had to discuss a lot before taking a decision on near data centre and redundant networks. I should say here that when RBI decided to open up ATMs and allow people to use any bank's ATM for cash withdrawal,  most transactions were rejected. We found that one big culprit was the inadequate network . Network capacity due to high rental costs were under low values. We can increase network bandwidth , no problem. But I found the bottleneck was the routers inadequacy and low capacity. So compromises with costs are necessary. Cost is not the ultimate criteria for selection.  Other factors like correct and complete customer service. 
9. I saw a bank rejecting TCS banks software because it needs compilation after each change. I consider it a good security check. We don't select a software package based on one factor. We have many factors to consider beyond functional completeness. We spent months of evaluation to arrive at a decision. We know the plus and minus of our selection. The dominant factors depend on reality and the situation. 
10.So I applied multidimensional and multidirectional thinking in my selections for these organisations.  We spent months deciding on a good ERP for many organizations, in particular for Jindal Steels , Karle infrastructure , Mysore sugar ,DG, shipping , etc. The decision depended on usability and adaptability and not costs.  We also considered the feasibility of integration.
11.My greatest involvement which used multidimensional thinking and approach was used for my inspections of colleges for approval and later for accreditation. Both used several factors like - infrastructure, equipment, computers, library, research, faculty competencies, teaching methods, curriculum etc. It was a complex task. 
12.Let me look at a question frequently posed to me by parents and students wanting to join an engineering degree program. What should be the selection criteria - selection based on a  good college or a better branch ? Most people were crazy about a good branch like computer science or ECE against a branch like civil engineering.  This question was posed to me by hundreds of people. I said that the best principle to follow is that the overall ambience of college is more  important than the branch . But I built   some caveats  in this principle. To me, it is a necessary condition that a student shouldn't get dissatisfied with the final selection. So I tell them that we will go through the  list of colleges and branches available  once we approach the selection time for a final decision . I had recommended some students to pick up mechanical engineering instead of electrical engineering as the students were in favour of mechanical engineering. Some are very clear on what they want . My son was clear that he wanted to join chemical engineering at KREC. So I yielded to his wish. Initially, I picked REC Trichy , but he was not happy. So I returned that allotted seat and waited for KREC counselling. 
13. Let me take you all back to our discussions on materialism vs spiritualism . 
A governing model now depends on GDP. Is that correct? What does it mean for poor people? Don't we bother about the environment? Is health and child mortality not important? Can we be materialistic without spiritualism? Does an agricultural produce belong to a farmer fully? Is there no role for nature - soil nutrients, rain water?Who owns nature?
All these lead us to the human development index over GDP.  
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
18/07/25, 5:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 778
Now let me return to my quote on Hinduism being assessed only on one factor ,that is caste , and Vinod's response. 
I agree with Vinod that today caste is a dominant economic and political factor for most  non brahmin communities. Brahmins lost control on most aspects of Hindu rituals for more than 50 years. The evidence is the surge of millions during many religious functions in many temples particularly in Tamilnadu . Hinduism today is governed and promoted by the OBCs . Most known astrologers are not brahmins. Brahmins have moved away from religion to commerce, from teaching to accountancy and banking to IT to AI. With the arrival of Mauchaley's education scheme, most brahmins moved away from vedas , scriptures and Sanskrit to English and jobs as clerks . So they moved far away from rigorous religious practices like daily vedic recitals to sandyavandanam . It has been Arbindo ghosh, mother, Swami chinmayananda, most maharashtrian  saints, purandara dasa, kanaka dasa, lingayat ,vokkaliga, kuruba and devanga saints, Narayana guru, Mata amritanandamayi, sadhguru and many others who have been propagating Hinduism for more than hundred years. They were and are brahminical as per manu smriti ,but not born as brahmins. 
One can do a better assessment of an aspect like energy or Hinduism by looking at the pros and cons. Hinduism is a lot more than caste. It is about dharma, culture, ethical practices and liberation. 
Hinduism assumes people have different habits, beliefs and behaviours. So it defined a four way path - karma, bhakti, jnana ,and yoga - to be followed by people. It allowed different types of rituals - puja at home, puja at temples, pilgrimages, festivals etc. It is more than a religion. It provides a purpose for life . If enjoins people to give, abhor violence, speak the truth, live harmoniously and follow order. It enriches our living through the asramas and our living culture. 
It took more than 1000 years to transform the religion through the puranas. We had  twisted the sastras to help the rulers and make the ruled ones as slaves. 
Discrimination happens even outside religion - in jobs . Why do we talk of class 4 employees in government service ? Is it not discrimination. The same kind of  discrimination happens in most organizations not only in India but in other countries as well. Caste syndrome exists everywhere. 
That concludes my discussions on binary thinking. 
Thanks Vinod.
Greetings 
Dks
19/07/25, 4:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 779
Let me return to my experiences in the institute in 1969-70. 
I was staying in F66  in the hostel from 1966 onwards till the end of 1970.  In  1970 ,two new hostels, one new mess designated as C mess , an apartment block for married students and a grand and huge gymkhana were built . Prof. Dhawan took a lot of interest in these constructions. The new hostels had single rooms . We fixed geysers in the bathrooms and discarded the inefficient, energy guzzling boilers - that happened due to a report submitted by me to the director comparing energy consumptions and savings. I showed substantial savings. So it was agreed to fit instant geysers in three bathrooms and storage geysers in others. This practice was followed afterwards in all hostels that came up. 
The C mess was a food pickup system from a central place like a buffet. It was a self service setup. It also had a cafeteria part.  No food was served at each table as was the practice in A and B messes. Unfortunately, the cafeteria,  a good idea, never came into operation . 
One other factor I observed in 1969 was a weak engineering services unit in the institute . The engineer we had till mid sixties ,Ramachar, retired and the new appointee was not upto his level of competence and so was relegated to maintenance . Even the maintenance was poor. So the construction work was supervised by a supervisor and Dhawan wasn't impressed by that. 
Similarly , we didn't have a good electrical unit. There was a supervisor and he died in 1969. Another electrical engineer was appointed ,but he was too mild and totally ineffective. We had a lot of power breakdowns in the hostel. Most electricians were not trained persons. I had to go at 11pm in the night and climb a pole and change the fuse. Electricians were scared . 
So Prof Dhawan decided to have a senior engineer from PWD on deputation as estate officer and project engineer. Mr K C Reddy from PWD joined the institute in 1970. I met him in the registrars room on his first day of joining. We became friends and he took my advice on many aspects. I knew him till his death. He planned his office well. He brought two engineers- Mr GovindaRao from PWD and Mr Thimme Gowda, an electrical engineer from KEB.  My friendship with Thimme Gowda became very close. He helped me a lot and I advised him on the  institute's power supply. He was committed to his job. The institute had professional help in its construction activities. By 1970, we got the new 11kv supply and ring main. We recruited some trained electricians and a young supervisor. Things looked up for the institute.  But regular maintenance was still poor. 
The estate office structure built at that time is continuing even now. Dhawan created an estate office for ISRO later and CNR Rao created an estate office for JNCASR.  
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
20/07/25, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 780
Let me continue with my learnings from IISc.  I am still in the period 1969-70.  
Let us discuss the importance of reforms for a leader. The first thing one learns to become a leader is to learn and follow an effective and smooth method of deciding and implementing both major and minor reforms. I not only learnt this process - it is not an idea but a whole sequence of essential prerequisites and actions needed for successful implementation of a proposed change- ,but also implemented it in many situations. I simplified and changed rules in anything I look at. That was my first step in my urge to improve things habit . 

By this time in 1969, I saw four  big reforms by Prof Dhawan :
1.Faculty evaluation and promotions - introduction of a contract system and a complete structure for detailed and fair evaluation of individuals. Evaluation was based on several factors - research work, teaching, sponsored projects, equipment development , consultancy and extension work.  It is a big reform . It revolutionized our academics and research. It encouraged sponsored projects , consultancy, and training teachers in other institutions. 
2. Revamping our power supply - he entrusted the job to me. 
3. Curriculum reform with the introduction of a credit system ,called unit system , with new structures. 
4. Setting up the estate office with engineers deputed from PWD and KEB. 
All three improved and speeded up the working of the institute.
He did these after several rounds of  discussions and analysing the various problems and difficulties that may come up after implementation.
 He also started breaking a few rules. One rule was that each department had a fixed number of faculty positions. So the department can advertise for a post only when a vacancy arises. I had to wait till GKrishna resigned in 1967 and a vacancy came up in the EE department and consequently ,I got selected as a faculty. 
Prof. Dhawan decided that if an academically suitable person was available, the institute will select him even  if there is no vacancy in the department. He went through the council to approve this change. He said there are no faculty positions in the department. All faculty positions belong to the institute and a holistic look will be taken on selections. He created extra positions, increased the budget allocation for that purpose and implemented his idea. This changed rule had its drawbacks . Some departments grew fast and some stagnated. The aerospace department grew very fast and the electrical department, a growing department, stagnated. 
But one major change or shakeup happened due to this changed rule. He decided to select many senior academics from India, US, Europe . He identified people and formed   expert committees and they selected people  found suitable. He recruited a sizable number - 30 to 40 while faculty strength at that time was around 200 plus.- of persons at senior positions like associate professor or professor. It created a cultural shock to the senior faculty present in the institute and shook up the system. 
 Many senior faculty like Prof V Krishnan, Prof AKN Reddy, Prof SV Rangaswamy , Prof IG Sarma, Prof LS Srinath, Prof Narasimhan, Prof Raju, joined many departments during the period 1970 to 72. This metamorphosed the senate. We got views and practices of many Indian and foreign universities in the discussions in the senate. While that was useful, it was resented by the older IISc professors. But faculty at IISc started to look seriously at the happenings in other institutions across the world and modified the good ones for adaptation in IISc.  The institute became vibrant with discussions in the coffee shop.  
One rule  pertaining to inbreeding was discussed and debated. Many universities do not recruit their students as faculty immediately after graduation. There were some faculty who wanted that rule to be implemented at IISc.  But after looking at the problems we will have if the rule was implemented, it was rejected. We felt that we have a fair process that gives opportunities to all candidates from any institution and so it is unfair to reject our students and deny them that opportunity of fair competition. If the country was producing hundreds or thousands of PhDs like US, then that rule might have some meaning. Since the country was producing very few PhDs in engineering and most of them from IISc,  it was felt that the rule would lead to disaster if implemented.  That shows our openness to ideas. 
Greetings 
Dks
21/07/25, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 781
“What is culture?
A society needs harmony and order in its survival and humanistic living. So it defines a set of mutually acceptable practices to be followed in public and that becomes culture. 
A person should know and  understand the daily , weekly and regular  interactions of individuals belonging to  different groups of  our society  in their lifestyle and living like eating, talking, working, habits, entertainment, rearing a family, helping others etc . He should  follow and act according to the established norms of the society  to become an accepted member of that society  . That is culture. “ my  simple view . Hinduism emphasizes harmony and order. So culture is embedded in it. 

Let me look at my first visit to Bombay. 
I needed to solve large problems for my optimization work for my PhD . So I decided to use the big CDC3600 computer at TIFR Bombay.  By this time  I became a friend of Mr PA Bukebag , an officer of the physics faculty. He visited IISc every summer to conduct the TIFR summer schools. It was an elaborate procedure. I used to have tea with him regularly . We used to go for kannada movies in the Majestic area. The majestic area had many cinema houses. Due to a fight between MGR fans and Rajkumar fans once, it was decided to screen only Kannada movies in the Majestic area and Tamil films in Ulsoor area. 
This kind of language fights occurred at regular intervals in Bangalore. In the seventies, eighties and part of the nineties, it was kannada vs tamil agitations and today it is kannada vs hindi fights. But I want to clarify that only a small fraction of kannadigas had this intense feeling. They made this agitation as a lucrative profession. Most kannadigas are very nice people , they definitely love their language , but they had adopted Lord Emsworth's concept of protest, a mild show of unhappiness with friends and no public dissent or resentment. Otherwise, they behaved like normal law following citizens minding their jobs. 

  I saw many kannada movies with him. I also picked up kannada alphabets and started reading kannada news items . 
My first source of  exposure to Bombay was through the several novels I read in my school days. Two of them gave me a good picture of bombay- kalki’s alaiosai and mayavi’s serial in Kadir. 
I learnt a lot about our villages , cities , Bombay, life of the poor and rich, independence struggle and common man's part in it , skepticism of Gandhi's non obedience movement etc. He gave a realistic picture of India of the early 20th century - 1930 to 1940s.  He painted a huge social and cultural canvas. A lot of people in Tamilnadu were addicted to his writings and even now many read his books. His historicals are also well researched and written.
 Mayavi wrote about Bombay culture. He described Matunga, kings circle, VT, flora fountain, Marine drive , and the people living in Bombay particularly two totally different communities - parsis and tamils. Tamils were conservative ,and stuck to their native culture. Parsis were very progressive. His novel talked about a relationship between a tamil girl and a Parsi leading to the birth of a child , abandonment of the girl and the willingness of a tamil boy to marry her. It was a very modern and progressive novel and it introduced me to a new urban sociological thinking and understanding about our different  societal groups and cultures. It gave a picture totally different from the usual conservative literature of that time. Surprisingly, it didn't post a revolutionary picture. It didn't preach. It described the happenings. The description was vivid and simple.  Inferencing is the reader's job. See the impact the novel had on me. I liked it , had a great interest in it and read it week after week as it appeared as a serial . 
My second source was the gossip and discussions that I listened to in my early school days from people visiting home for vacation. Many youngsters worked  in Bombay and came home for the summer holidays. They talked  about the small houses, suburban trains, concerns food - Thursday it was onion sambar- , and big Bazars etc. Actually ,a neighbour of ours died while traveling by a suburban train and his family relocated in the village . They used to talk about Bombay.  Another , a neighbour's son, was working as a scientist in Bombay.  He came with his children. His son, Ramakrishnan joined ITC for a job later  and became a good friend of mine . I got different perspectives of life and struggles in Bombay.  Many younger children wanted to go to Bombay for jobs. That was the charm of that city in our minds. 
So even though I hadn't visited Bombay till 1969, I had a good idea of that city and always hoped that I would visit it one day in my life. That happened in 1969. I didn't visit for a day, but spent 15 days in Bombay ,in south Bombay - Colaba.  
Let me discuss my Bombay visit in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
22/07/25, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 782 
“Hinduism encouraged social interactions through festivals, samskaras, pilgrimages. Even organizations like sabhas and samitis were described in the Rigveda.  So there is a strong cultural component in Hinduism. “

My stay in Bombay was a different and new experience. I wanted to stay close to TIFR . So I wrote to Bukebag. He organized a room for me in the atomic energy department hostel near the old yachts club close to Gateway of India. 
I chose a train route to Bombay via Miraj / pune instead of Guntakal. It was a leisurely travel, less crowded and so easy to get a reservation. I traveled by meter gauge train to Miraj, then took a broad gauge train to Pune and then changed to  another  broad gauge train to Bombay VT. I took the mail leaving in the night from Bangalore . I went to the hostel  from VT station . I went to TIFR the next day, met Bukebag . He introduced me to Mr GN Patak ,office manager in the computer centre. I got an account on the computer. 
I went to the west canteen for breakfast. My food style changed a lot. I didn't eat rice during the fifteen days stay. I ate breakfast, lunch in the west canteen and dinner in the east canteen. Both breakfast and lunch were western style - bread toast, cornflakes, cutlets, soup, boiled veg .  etc. I didn't eat eggs and so I didn't eat an omelet . Dinner was chapati and subji. 
I met several people in the canteen. I met Prof R Narasimhan during breakfast time . He wasn't a communicative person. But he was polite with me. I had mid day coffee also in the canteen. I used to walk for a short time after lunch with Bukebag.  I met Dr Sarabhai, N Seshagiri , and many others. I spent a whole day talking to Seshagiri. I met many people from Saha institute of Nuclear physics, atomic energy department who were using the computers , but none from IIT Bombay.  
 I used to come by 8am by TIFR bus and stay till 7pm. I left by TIFR bus. The bus started midway between Churchgate and VT stations. I had to walk to my hostel. That was my routine. 
In those days Dadabhai Nauroji road used to be almost deserted after 7pm . Walking in that street was risky. Too many fraudsters and touts. Marine drive was better. 
I went with Bukebag for dinner at Concerns . I got a full view of Matunga . It looked like a Tamil place. But Bombay had a lot of kannadigas . I found many in TIFR itself. 
I didn't go to any other place in Bombay.  I was busy at TIFR with my work from morning to evening.  
I hadn't programmed in Fortran so far. I bought a book at TIFR and picked up Fortran in a day. I had some familiarity before and so within two days ,I wrote my first loadflow program. Programming was so easy compared to the low level languages I used in NAL and HAL. The computer system used punched cards. So I learned how to use the key punch machine. I spent half a day punching my program and data . Data punching was a bit involved as it depended on the column strictly or the values would change.  
Access to computers is through a batch system and several batches were run day and night. So I used to run my program deck several times in a day and so debugging was fast. Within a few days I tried several load flow methods and tested them. 
Computer operations were well organized.  We got our deck and printouts after every batch run. There was no missing the  decks or results . Access was great. People were helpful. It was a dream period of computing on a high speed , long wordlength machine. It is a tragedy that CDC didn't succeed. Business was more in commercial computing and IBM excelled there and that destroyed both CDC and Burroughs.  
In England the computer companies merged to form ICL . It stayed for a longer period. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
23/07/25, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 783
What is an intrinsic view of culture?
“It is a set of dynamic practices that makes one a societal human with harmony, empathy, tolerance, nonviolence, sharing as essential principles. Culture is non dogmatic, embracing multiple and even opposing views and practices. Culture is not based on ideal principles.Hinduism  embodies these practical and societal principles in its concepts of dharma. ”
Culture is an important and integral part of Hinduism. Hinduism is the only non dogmatic religion. It accepts every practice and many beliefs and views. It provides many paths to live . It allows multiple cultures by several groups to coexist. 


Let me discuss the ambience - both physical and human-  in TIFR and the computer centre. 
Physically, I found TIFR  a remarkable place- close to the sea, lots of open spaces , lots of walking areas, calm and serene, soothing, beautiful with lots of paintings chosen by Bhabha ,providing an aesthetics that makes you become serious and feel like sitting and contemplating about many things in the world. My reflections ,after seeing hundreds of institutions across the world ,are that I found Bhabha was very unique in blending several aspects to create a synergy producing ambience - an oasis in a mad, crowded , hurrying world of mostly  people who didn't have any time to relax , to think, to contemplate and who led a busy ,mechanical life. His decision to set up the atomic energy department away from the high handed Delhi bureaucracy , and to create a serene and serious atmosphere in a crowded city with a lot of thinking and meticulous planning in many areas is to be admired by all of us. 
After meeting with many greats in the country, I find him to be the tallest of all. 
Functionally also, the ambience was great. There are no lavish offices for even the senior professors . The entire place was clean , you didn't find garbage thrown anywhere.  Toilets were well maintained. 
But it is the human interactions that attracted my attention.  Most faculty were serious, aloof,and lived in their own world. But there were lively and intense professional interactions happening everyday. The urge to learn was evident. There was a class system. There was intense rivalry. The normal outlook was serious and critical . The system was to me a cruel but necessary one - it didn't tolerate tardiness, mediocrity and laziness. It wanted work of high quality . Most scientific people were on contract and were thrown out if found incompetent and didn't produce any good research  outputs . Later, I saw the full force of the system . I found that many scientific staff needed to find a job outside. Prof Narasimhan helped in finding jobs for many ,to name a few - SV Rangaswamy, Ramasubramanian,Mendiratta. 
Most employees were highly dedicated. They knew they had to work hard to help the scientists and help science to grow. Their dedication was something you won't find anywhere in India. I saw a similar intensity - both academic and administrative - later in the computer science department at the University of Manchester. 
The helping tendency was evident in the computer centre. It was an open system where a user wanted something and the office and operators helped them. Again ,I saw for the first time, a highly costly and high powered computer centre had welcoming arms to embrace everyone who wanted to use the computer. I wonder why we don't have this open arms attitude in any institution and with  most people in India? 
Definitely ,I have come across several people  with a public and open  helping attitude both in IISc and elsewhere. But that number is a miniscule in my acquaintances. I keep asking why we are so self centred, shy and not worried about others. Definitely ,most help their colleagues  with office work . But public spirit is lacking. I am not just talking about government staff , but faculty and teachers  in colleges and schools . Most are not open to share their knowledge and help others in any other place.  
Fortunately, IISc is  also different in this respect ,in helping others , but our operational systems are poor and not designed to help. But we helped most faculty in other institutions and teachers in schools. I will contrast this TIFR ambience with IISc ambience in the coming posts. 
Coming back to the outside computer users in TIFR, it was amazing to see the open support extended by the computer centre to them. All TIFR facilities - bus transport, canteens are open to them, no inspections are done. All are treated equally ,no discrimination. The computer charges were nominal. It is becoming difficult to see such types of systems today. It is still easier to enter IISc.  But I found the security barriers in many private engineering colleges in Bangalore highly irritating. They look at you as a criminal. The security in most of these institutions have not been trained to treat people as humans and had no clue as to whom to admit and whom not to. Such kinds of security is prevalent in most places in India.  We give powers to these people and that gets abused.
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
24/07/25, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 784

The users in TIFR were provided a separate room to work. There were users from different institutions and there were good discussions and help happening there . We were helping each other in debugging the programs. I helped many in rewriting the programs . Later I helped many in the institute in writing programs including Prof Joseph. 
This was the first time I saw a different institution. Mr Bukebag told me a lot about TIFR. I also saw the organization of the computer centre . It gave a new perspectives for me  to compare two institutions - IISc and TIFR.  I saw many similarities and differences. 
Before I discuss the differences between both institutions, let me pose a question:
What is an institution?
We can describe the infrastructure , faculty, outputs etc to define an institution. It was the first time in my life that I was thinking about this question after exposure to TIFR . I realised there is some inherent aspect unique to an institution. What is it? How do we find it? How do we follow it? 
This quest  led to another question 
Who is a human?
How do we define a human being ?
-As one with two hands, two feet, walks erect, talks etc. Or
-As a farmer, merchant, teacher, clerk etc.
- Or Good or bad etc. 
One answer was to discriminate between humans and animals .
some said a  rational person. Some said thinking capability. Some said they can learn etc. 
Religion came with an answer: humans have a  soul. A soul is a mix of many characteristics like good or bad or evil , many behaviours like shy, social etc , or many habits , capabilities.According to Hinduism,  even animals have souls. 
Even , you can't say humans are social , ants are also social. 
My take is to consider the overall aspect of human lives to define and the word I found is culture . Culture here includes all types of interactions in a society , not restricted to festivals and functions. Culture includes soul also here. It includes routine actions like farming, teaching etc. 
I don't know of any other word that defines a human holistically , not in a piecemeal / partitioned way or describing physical or functional aspects only. So I use the word culture here. I think that man is a cultural entity. Culture can be different for a person, a family , a family, a village, a city and a country. There may be hundreds of cultures we see in India , some with small differences ,some with large differences but mostly with a common core based on capabilities and interactions. 
It looks simple , but I am struggling to define this . I can use the concept used by Yajnavalkya in Brihadaranyaka upanishad to define Brahman using “not “- it is not this, not that etc. 
Soul is a good way of describing a human , but it reflects mostly on  internal actions and not on external interactions. The soul doesn't reflect our views on nature, resources, our adaptations to changes, our inventions etc. So I used the term culture to include all these aspects . I assumed that culture is by definition interactive and changing. But I also feel that culture is a vague term , not precise and is normally used for groups. So one can say that humans are a socially interactive entity? Is there a better way of defining humans? 
Your comments please.
I want to see a deeper intrinsic meaning in an institution. Let us discuss it in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
25/07/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 785
A small partial break from my question - Who is a human?  and go back to culture.
Mr Sambamurthy comments :
“Your comments on culture are quite insightful, but brief. Societal harmony is key to Hinduism. But today 's politicians appear to use "Culture" to divide rather unify society. How do we course correct this. In my sense philosophers and intellectuals like you have a role to play. Look forward to your comments.
Regards”

My answer is simple and consistent. 
The malaise is :
All are confused about sanatana dharma. We don't have an authentic text . Many people add masala to vedic texts or misinterpret them . This includes a large number of people - foreigners as well as Indian religious persons. This needs correction by a group of unbiased and to some extent irreligious persons - some good Sanskrit scholars - to prepare a book on rig veda. RL Kashyap did a good job decades ago. 
There are many views of our dharma. 
Some look at as a caste system
Some look at it as a temple system
Some are very righteous thinking they are the authority to pronounce what is prescribed in sastra  and what is not.( Incidentally, sastras according to our religion are only the vedas including upanishads. There are many alternatives provided by the religion. There is no “one rule fits all “ doctrine. ) 
Some look at it as a purana - bhagavata based system with bhakti as the sole motive.
Some feel it is in danger and they have to fight to protect it.
Everyone thinks he is right and others wrong. So there is a world of confusion. Everyone reads some scripture and not the right ones and not fully, defines his or her interpretation and declares that is correct. Most people have converted a non dogmatic religion into a dogmatic one. Where are the dogmas defined in vedas for our practices and even prayers. All dharsanas go in different directions and that is accepted. 
It is time to call the bluff. 
So we need education at the school level . Teach the essentials of rig veda and some upanishads . Leave out practices - smritis and agamas. Children will start understanding sanatana dharma better. 
Secondly our universities should undertake interpretations and research on sanatana dharma in a non dogmatic manner. 
Those are the first steps. But religion is emotional, a calm approach is not easy. There are landmines around. 
Thanks Mr Sambamurthy.  

My understanding of humans has two broad segments - internal and external. While calling a human a cultural entity, I didn't portray a complete picture of a human. 
I want to look at three dimensions,  not just two. All three are not entities, but connectivities. 
The first is the internal dimension - who you are? What is your purpose and goals? Why should you live? How should you live? What should you do? How do you decide and act?
It is a big dimension. It is covered by so many disciplines like anatomy , physiology, psychology, yoga, nutrition, medicine, surgery, neurology, mental sciences, philosophy , behaviour sciences etc. 
The physical side of a human itself is complex . It is not a static phenomenon. We still are unraveling the processes of many thousands of reactions  happening in us every second. 
If the physical connectivity is complex and still has mysteries, the mental side is more complex. Mental components may act in opposite directions. Reactions are more complex. The mind is our connector to the outside along with our sensors. 
The second dimension is our external interactions. Again there are two subdivisions here- our interactions with society, and our interactions with nature. We have a good idea of culture as interactions with society. 
Let us look at interactions with nature. The interactions with nature are dominant in Rig veda. Rig veda thanks all natural forces in detail . It prays for all forces and all elements including animals. Its concept of ahimsa extends to animals and plants. It sees divinity in nature. Similarly chamakam in yajur veda details a complete picture of geology and geography and prays to them.
The third dimension is our religious and spiritual dimension. We will look at it in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
26/07/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  786
We saw that humans are not alone. They are connected . First they formed a group called society and built culture to bind the connection. Qualities of a society are described in detail in the vedas.  The importance of harmony , sharing and order have been described in Rig veda and detailed in Atharva veda - sammannasya suktam.
“Like-heartedness, like-mindedness, non-hostility do I make for you; do ye show affection (hary) the one toward the other, as the inviolable [cow] toward her calf when born.”
“Having superiors (jyā́yasvant), intentful, be ye not divided, accomplishing together, moving on with joint labor (sádhura); come hither speaking what is agreeable one to another; I make you united (sadhrīcī́na), like-minded.”
“Your drinking (prapā́) [be] the same, in common your share of ​food; in the same harness (yóktra) do I join you together; worship ye Agni united, like spokes about a nave.”
“United, like-minded I make you, of one bunch, all of you, by [my] conciliation; [be] like the gods defending immortality (amṛ́ta); late and early be well-willing yours.”
We can consider the above as the foundational principles of culture. There are hundreds of superstructures , which give variety and variability to culture. A normal human life is built on this understanding of give and share, harmony and order principles. 

 Second, they depended on nature to live . Though Sanatana dharma realised the importance of nature, people did lip service to nature without understanding the implications of nature. But Sanatana dharma knew the forces of nature and their role in our life. 
Isa upanishad says 
“All belong to God. Use them sparingly in a sacrificial manner. “
We believe in ahimsa. 
So people connected and kept connecting with nature. 
There is a difference between the first connection - culture and the second - environment. 
The first is mostly local, and manageable with few uncertainties. Most objectives are achievable at simplistic levels. Mathematically, culture has variety and predictability  but it is finite and less complex . Not so nature. Nature is complex, infinite, and uncertain. Mysteries increase. Understanding is poor with many unknowns. 
Then the question arises :
I get food and shelter from nature , living from culture, then why religion is needed for me? 
I haven't given food to my minds. I haven't understood my minds. I live more mentally than physically . Mental connect involves curiosity,  eternal search, understanding and unraveling the mysteries. 
The first thing I want to know as a human is :what is this expanding mysterious brahmandam called universe, space and their evolution?  That connect is provided by  religion. Hinduism, particularly yajur veda, has a strong religious component .
So we have three connects - culture with society, environment with nature and religion with cosmos. Hinduism embeds all three. Spirituality goes beyond to search for Brahman and cosmic forces . 
Greetings
Dks
27/07/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 787
“A soul is commonly understood as the immaterial essence or core of a living being—a principle that is thought to confer individuality, personality, consciousness, and, in many traditions, life itself.”
“the soul is seen as that which makes a being truly themselves—the seat of mind, will, emotions, moral character, and sometimes rational thought.”

Perplexity AI answer

Let us now look at the question
What is an institution ?
An institution is equal to humans in many respects. It has a culture. Many institutions are built on fear and subordination. 
First thing we need to understand is that dealing with people and interacting with people is a primary purpose of an organization. It is not trade, sales, banking, teaching, transportation, supply of goods and services etc.
People here means customers, suppliers, employees . Daily there are hundreds of interactions with people in an organization. This is true with academic institutions which deal with tens of thousands of students with a lot of energy, enthusiasm and expectations. A similar situation, but at a smaller scale,  exists with banks and retail outlets. 
So we need a different look at our organizations and institutions.
An educational should not worry only about equipments, computers, courses and examinations. It's job is mould the students and meet their expectations. 
The first expectation is transparency and openness. Students want to know why a decision is taken by the head, and what necessitated  that decision. Unfortunately , this aspect is missing in most colleges . Fear is pervading everywhere. Students were and are silenced . They can't ask questions. It is like a military camp. I even saw in some  colleges severe punishments given to students for a small noncompliance.  In one college students absenting from attendance to classes are fined heavily. The pleading of some parents that their son was sick didn't elicit any response. In all places the only interface for students and faculty is powerless ignorant and meek clerk. That is the interface. It is a mystery and puzzle  to all about the happenings.  
The second expectation is treatment. Don't treat students like cattle. Don't consider them as a nuisance.  Treat them as intelligent persons who enhance the level of the institution. Treat them as friends and associates. Most students don't bother about their college because of this negligence. Colleges don't utilise their distinction students with respect and they don't realise that they don't help their distinction students, but the distinction students bring credit to the institution. 
This treatment is a highly complex activity. There is inequality or class system prevalent in most places - poor vs rich, rural vs urban , etc. This is seen even at the level of students as well as faculty. In an NIT, one faculty member told me in an open meeting that professors promoted under career advancement scheme were considered inferior to selected professors even by the families. Failure is hurting deeply. 
Institutions treat all students as one with equal capability. They don't understand their students. So the third aspect is empathy . Empathy is absent in all our organizations. Power brings in arrogance.  Today's prime need is empathy. Treat people as humans first and not as dirt. 
The fourth and important aspect is fairness. People resent unfair treatment. I was never abused by our employees though I was the chair of the central evaluation committee for 14 plus years. They knew that I was fair, and didn't play the game of favourites. In many selections, the candidates told me that my questions were good and technical and openly appreciated me. As I said  before, I had thousands of interactions with suppliers . Most respected my decision. They appreciated my fairness. Even one company withdrew a case filed by them in high court. Next to an answer to the question why, it is fairness that satisfies the people. 
Next is straightforward behavior by faculty and management is another aspect. Some are devious. 
All these lead to the most basic component - creation of a good value system and maintaining them. That is the top most requirement. That will motivate all to do their best. 
So by and large, an institution has a soul and a culture . They are not easily visible but they play a role in making the institution a great one . 
People ask me why a college could reach the level of IISc? They say IISc is great because it gets the best students and they get mediocre students. They are not seeing beyond their noses. They don't see the worth of their best students. They don't create an open  culture in their institution. Their value systems are poor. They don't see it. Today these requirements are essential even for a trader or a bank. I hope that  government offices come somewhere near these desirable values. 
So we say an institution is a physical entity with its soul.
Greetings 
Dks
28/07/25, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 788

Before I get back to discuss the soul of IISc as understood by me, let me discuss a comment by Prof. Karunakara:
“Apart from social interactions human can also elevate himself to realize Supreme(Brahma) with no form- (Nirguna Brahman) where all his cultural characters will shade out and can become one with universe. In this state he may not have cultural bindings and can guide other fellow beings to realize such unique state. Please correct me if anything wrong.”

My response
I agree with you. I tried to look at five dimensions of humans in their interactions with other entities :
Social  - culture
Nature - environment
Mental - knowledge and soul- jnana - from society, nature, universe , teachers. 
Religious - with universe
Spiritual - enlightenment state.
These five deal with human interactions. There are many dimensions for humans themselves like - body, internal and external sensors, input and output units, nutrients distribution, enzymes generators, pranic circulation, minds , behaviours, habits, emotions, multiple  control units. 
Spiritualists and vedantins try to understand Brahman through eternal search. They realised a number aspects of the universe like:
The universe is vast , expanding and changing. Nothing is constant. So reality is not to look at the universe through physical eyes but through intense mental , ununderstood processes to learn more about the unchanging ,unknown, all pervading, reality . That reality is called Brahman- nirguna Brahman.
There is a lot of energy in the universe . How did it come about? How this energy move around? What cosmic reactions are happening and why? What is gravitational energy? Physicists also look at these questions. There is a lot of mysteries here or unknowns here. 
How did life forms evolve ? Again, this question is looked at by Darwin and by Rig veda ,long before Darwin. Rig veda has multiple interpretations on evolution . It uses the creation part for initial seeding and then assumes that things are growing slowly . So there is an implication of initial creation followed by evolution and growth . We are today seeing the rapid mental - knowledge- growth in the past 200 plus years . It is not a pure selection only process . There is an intense learning and discrimination - viveka- process happening. 
Our knowledge of a wave is not clear. Ask a simple question - how solar energy comes to us . We have answers - photons. But we don't have full answers how photons get energy from the sun , how they transfer it into heat and electrical forms. Or heat comes in another form . We know electrons emit energy when going to a lower orbit in the form of heat. So are there more subatomic particles in waves? . How many particles do the sun rays carry? We do know that there is more space and very  less matter at subatomic level. We know that there are vibrations that are dominant at that subatomic level. So studying waves in many dimensions is useful. 
There was a strong feeling that we get some inputs to our consciousness when we are in deep sleep - turia state. 
But the greater problem is that waves carry many things. We know about radio signals moving in space over long distances. So consciousness is moving around the universe . Waves transmit information. We haven't decoded them yet . 
For the ease of understanding by common people , Hinduism introduced saguna Brahman- a god, a manifestation of nirguna Brahman, but with many gunas- features. People worship the gods. 

 Hinduism focuses on dharma and builds many additional constructs like rituals, philosophy, samskaras, living conditions, societal behaviours,  nature , forces, etc. Whatever is your approach, whatever is your beliefs, whoever is your god and whatever is your sampradaya or agamas, one thing is constant in hinduism - that is to follow all dos and don'ts prescribed in vedas like harmony, order, truth, peace, non violence, sharing etc. But we have  forgotten dharmic principles and have given great emphasis to rituals . We need to reverse this approach.  
Greetings
Dks
29/07/25, 5:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 789
I discussed the serious and concentrated research work and helping tendency at TIFR. Let me compare it with IISc.  I already talked about IISc ambience. 
Both are highly committed to research . IISc also is committed to the advancement of teaching and learning. 
Both work on cutting edge areas. But IISc works on several areas like many sciences and most engineering disciplines. IISc was a pioneer in engineering education and research. It started the PG programs before independence . IISc  also opened up many new areas of research. That became a landmark of IISc.  Instead of creating new areas of research in an existing department,  IISc decided to set up new units to provide more freedom for a  new area to flourish without influences from existing beliefs of departments.  This allowed free thinking . This destroyed stagnation of academic beliefs. Just like religious beliefs, there are stronger academic beliefs and they are difficult to change . These academic beliefs destroy futuristic thinking . I recall the fight to call electrical engineering as the electrical and electronics engineering department, the objections coming from the ECE department.  Similarly ,there were objections for CSA to use the name system science . Many departments changed names. These flexible approaches helped IISc to go forward without timelags. Many new units started in the institute. TIFR also did this experiment on a smaller scale. It spanned new institutions like NCBS. 
TIFR is focused on physics , computer science and mathematics . 
IISc admits students and awards degrees. TIFR focuses on doctoral work only. 
IISc focused on applicative  work very extensively . Some examples are health , water resources, wind tunnel research and testing, soils studies, power networks design, computerization, rural technologies, renewable energy, ASTRA Ole, biogas,  defence, and space related research , advices to the problems encountered by governments both state and centre . This is in addition to our regular basic research activities. But it became a major concern of the institute. We set up ASTRA,  CES , KSCST to look at alternatives.  
While both helped the academic and research communities in India, IISc is more open to visits and informal discussions , lectures and seminars etc. In the beginning ,the library was open to students and faculty of any university or college or research labs. In the sixties, I used to see many senior faculty from Bangalore university in our library in the evenings at regular intervals . When many engineering colleges came up , lots of students used our library for referencing. Spending a day in the library was common. Library staff were very helpful in locating books for users. NAL used to run a bus load of scientists to use our library every Friday. Later , access was restricted due to misuse of the library by some students.  
IISc  had an egalitarian atmosphere. No one interfered with others' work. Independence , freedom , and appreciation pervades in the institute. The freedom enjoyed by most is great , but it doesn't push research students to speed up their work. But there was no fear on the campus. Most were happy. This atmosphere helped the institute to grow. 

Greetings 
Dks
30/07/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 790
After a week of fruitful stay at TIFR,  I returned to Bangalore via Miraj . 
I resumed my computing work at HAL. But the major change in my daily schedule was discussions with Prof Devanathan. I spent hours with him. My mathematics knowledge improved considerably with my association with him. 
Secondly, Prof Lewis joined the Foreign languages department to teach English . We had two lecturers teaching English already in the department.  I started associating with Prof Lewis to improve my English skills. I spent the next two years attending his lectures- not formal, but more discussions focusing on Indian practices, pronunciation etc. We gave seminars in the course. I was also attending a Russian language course with Dr Ganeshasundaram.
 It was unfortunate that the entire foreign languages department is non-existent now. That is a disadvantage of ad hoc experimentation. All directors are not like Prof Dhawan who spent considerable time in decision making and consulted many. This decision on foreign languages was almost an impulsive one. 
Another major event that happened was with Prof HNR. He became a UPSC member and resigned his job at IISc.  Prof Narayana Iyengar became the head . He depended on me on most of the things. 
I got involved with admissions of students for BE and ME. We introduced an entrance exam for BE admissions first in the EE department in 1970 and later it became a common exam for the three departments running the BE program. 
As I said earlier , the institute started to revamp the curriculum . I got involved in that fully. Mr R Vaidyanathan Asst Registrar handling academic matters became a good friend . We discussed many aspects of his section. He had a young  office supervisor by name Seshadri, a very smart person who ran the section very efficiently . Unfortunately ,he died suddenly, an untimely and unexpected and shocking death. So Vaidyanathan's role increased. We introduced for the first time a daily engagement diary for faculty in 1970. It was a simple one. It was improved over the years and became an important information and data companion for faculty. 
The telephone system was manual at that time ,not automatic. We had two incoming lines and connections to mostly hods,  officers, and offices, a very limited connection. If I wanted to make a call or receive a call, I had to go to the office. That was the state for most people.  As I mentioned before about untrained electricians, our telephone operator was not a trained person. He wasn't a disciplined person. One day , the registrar dismissed him for negligence. He brought his family and left them outside the registrar's chambers. So after the drama , he was reinstated. 
I also helped Vaidyanathan with admissions. We organised a huge program for a week showing MS Subbulakshmi's music program at the UN. We issued coupons to interested persons. It was screened in the library seminar hall. It was a grand activity and a very successful one. I would have heard MS several times each day. It was a memorable week. I also attended some carnatic music programs at chamrajpet with him. 
Mr Vaidyanathan left for Canada in 1970 . He was teaching a mathematics course for biochemists and I started teaching his mathematics for biochemistry students from August 1970 onwards . I continued teaching that course for three years. Prof Cama , the head of biochemistry also taught the course with some applications. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
31/07/25, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 791
1969 was a year of travels for me. I visited Madras twice  to repair our electromechanical calculators.  I again visited Madras to see off Prof HNR to Delhi. I visited Ahmedabad , my first visit to Gujarat, for a CBIP conference in July 1969. That was the historic occasion of Neil Armstrong landing on the moon. Immediately afterwards, my IEEE paper was presented in September 1969. I visited Delhi for a CBIP conference in November 1969. I visited Bombay twice. I also visited IIT Bombay during my visit to TIFR.I visited IIT Kanpur in December 1969. This was my first visit to Kanpur. I went to Delhi and stayed with Prof HNR and went to kanpur the next day.  It was a cold time. I experienced very cold days for the first time. The food was good . I could relish the food. 
It was a great networking time for me. I met Prof Kelkar, IIT director. He was an old student of IISc- EE department.  I also met Mr FC Kohli there. I met Dr HW Dommel and Dr Dravid from Bonneville power administration who both conducted workshops before the conference.  We had a lot of lively discussions . Dr Sastry from the EE department of IIT Kanpur  asked Dr Dravid about his original place. Dr Dravid said it was Kanpur but Dr Sastry had doubts . I was discussing my work with Dr Dommel . He appreciated my work. We discussed the pros and cons of Nuclear energy. 
1969 was the first year that I attended several conferences. My exposure was very good. The CBIP conference gave me opportunities to network with chairmen and chief engineers of many electricity boards in the country. I became a good friend of Mr CVJ Verma ,secretary, CBIP. 

Let me look at my PhD program. After Prof HNR left for Delhi in 1969 , I had to decide on a new PhD supervisor. This was not easy. My real supervisor was Prof Devanathan . But I needed someone in the department.  I didn't want anyone from the power systems side as they were working on mostly older topics . I didn't have anyone in the computer area. So I needed a person who could support me. I chose Deekshatulu as my supervisor. He also left for the US on a sabbatical in 1970 . By then I submitted my thesis. I selected Prof Iyengar as my supervisor. He conducted my PhD viva. 
I had two learnings from these experiences. 
Change is happening most of the time and at unexpected times. 
Self learning and self directed work, though difficult, is essential in life. It helps one during eventualities. Since,  there were no power systems or computer specialists, I didn't lose my interest in my topic and shift to a new topic. I was firm and determined to struggle,  learn, understand  and apply my knowledge to solve the large problems. I struggled and succeeded in my research.  I don't want to be a part of a crowd or a bandwagon of researchers . Those two were common. I wanted to break new grounds, look at less understood and less researched areas and go at them. I have followed this research adventure throughout my life. That helped me to keep abreast of new frontiers. Even today ,I try to understand the research going on in AI. 
Another general aspect amongst researchers is to focus on one area and concentrate on it and go deeper in that area. I tried a mix and match approach ,a kind of applicative and interdisciplinary work. I moved into many areas- started with power systems, moved into computer operating systems and then to transactions processing and then to distributed databases, then to data mining and also moved into two new areas - large regional integrated energy systems, rural energy optimization, and environment. So I went through a large canvas and didn't narrow my research focus. 
Let us see why I chose this unusual ,uncommon path in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
01/08/25, 6:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 792
Let me look at one question that used to bug researchers? 
There are two options 
1.To work in a reasonably known area with enough research going on in that area in the world with sufficient reference material or
2.Work in a new developing or upcoming area.
Most researchers chose option 1. I chose 2 with three areas interacting with each other and with mathematics.  The areas are
Power systems analysis and optimization
Computational methods and numerical analysis.  And
Computer based problem solving , programming and errors analysis. 
To know the situation at that time in the EE department,  let us see the broad picture of active researchers pursuing PhD.
About 3 faculty worked on power devices - relays and machines, but not on power systems. Dr.G Krishna who was senior to me by many years submitted his PhD thesis and got the degree ,but his work was on machines. Later he shifted to my area of power systems optimization and afterwards to pattern recognition.
About 5 faculty members worked on control systems . Deekshatulu got it going with his PhD on nonlinear systems. The control system  was just coming up as a developing area ,but there was a lot of work going on in that area for about a decade or more and about 40 people were working in IISc and IITs in India.  There were not many working in power systems as well as computers. Most worked on analytical approaches. No faculty was getting involved with numerical methods. Even in mathematics, there were very few working on numerical analysis at that time in India.  None worked on computational methods looking at errors and convergence for a large problem. 

What gave me a lot of confidence to plough a lonelier and unfamiliar path were the following facts based on my experiences in the past one year:
1. I learnt several low level programming languages in a few days and wrote large programs. 
2.I shifted to Fortran easily ,wrote large programs and solved large problems . It was not easy to get good data for large systems. 3.Data adjustments and corrections were big problems. I managed them. 
4.I developed several numerical techniques.
5.I got lots of results and published many papers. 
6.I could find fault with an IEEE paper. 
7.I wrote a short paper on matrices in IEEE transactions on control systems. 
8. One thing I quickly adopted was to teach what I learnt . I introduced in 1969 to 71, some new courses on computational methods, optimization techniques, computer applications to power systems , etc. That made me to go in depth and look for alternatives in these courses. This was very useful to keep me on my toes in learning the latest. The journal “ACM computing surveys “ was a useful tool for me to learn. 
8.I got a lot of exposure to computer systems in detail from Burroughs corporation books. 
9.I learnt about the just developing area of operating systems and included it in teaching my course. Data structures was taught by me for the first time  in India around the same  time Andrew Yg taught it . 
10. I upgraded my course to a much higher level and named it computing systems and devices.
11. I got a greater exposure to optimisation and taught the first course on optimization in 1970. I even devised a method for linear programming. OR was just then developing into a new discipline. I started working on simulation - both continuous systems and discrete systems . In 1970, I developed a new language called Cospro. 
All the above gave me the confidence to wade into new disciplines. My fear of unknowns went away and I enjoyed learning new concepts and principles. 
It opened my mind. I moved away from the general thinking and accepted new thinking. I didn't get scared of being a loner and a rebel. I got the courage to be different. The most important belief at that time was that numerical methods will not give better solutions than analytical solutions. Almost all others were working on analytical solutions . I was the only one to work on numerical methods guided by many IEEE papers. We had arguments. There were a large number of faculty at IISc who considered programming an inferior topic and software  not a discipline. They lived in their past world. It surprised me and pained me.
Despite all that being said,I believe that  it was providence that chose my area of research, not any rational thinking. It gave me courage .
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
02/08/25, 5:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 793
The main reason I wrote the last post was the struggle that most research students went through in the sixties and seventies and even the eighties for selecting an area and a topic. A few students spent years browsing the literature to choose a topic. 
Let me discuss the PhD research being done in the department by some of my contemporaries. 
I had been working on my topic , a predetermined one from my ME days,  from day minus one of my starting my research work. I registered with HNR.  I joined in August 1967 and I submitted a research proposal to UGC in August itself and became a UGC senior research fellow from September onwards till I became a faculty in April 1968. I finished most of my work by 1969 and submitted my thesis by April 2000. So due to my quick decision on my topic, progress of my research was quick and I submitted before three years time. 
 I had two colleagues of the same age , VVS Sarma and N Viswanadham. They were one year senior to me in ME. They  started their research one year before me. They picked their topics . They were guided by Dr. Deekshatulu. Their work was progressing satisfactorily.  Dr. Deekshatulu , fresh after getting his PhD ,was guiding several including these two. I was also close to him and normally met him almost everyday and discussed many things with him freely . It was a great lifelong friendship that goes on even now . So the research activities of ours were smooth without major turbulence.  We used to go for morning coffee together and also to the mess. I recall an  incident that both me and NV liked drumsticks and there was a competition between me and him on picking drumsticks from sambar in the A mess.
But we had a colleague in the department and that  colleague  also registered with Deekshatulu for his PhD. Everyday he used to talk about his PhD topic selection ordeal. His main problem was indecisiveness. Each day , he would talk about an area , saying that area is interesting. Then he would say after a few days that he didn't like that area and moved to another area. He openly expressed his dilemma to us when we went for coffee. This went on for a year and continued further until he was distracted by other things . He couldn't decide on his topic. The momentum was lost. He didn't do PhD at all. Later after some years , he left the institute and joined ITI. 
I also  saw two students  who joined as research students ,one in EE and another in ME , a few years later. At that time, not many joined for PhD. They couldn't select a topic even after two years. They were hard working, spent most of their time in the library reading papers , were regular in their habits and had a good and stable mind . But both couldn't choose a topic and left the institute without a degree after a few years. In some cases  this topic selection delayed their work by several years over the normally expected one year period. Hence the importance of this . 
One big problem in research is distraction .
Some get involved in games indoor or outdoor, some in fiction etc. Some start teaching or lab work. While that works in the US, it doesn't work here. A strong work culture of spending several hours working on a research problem is a must for doing decent research. 24/7 thinking is essential for success in research. Your supervisor will not think for you. Organization and planning are other requirements.  
Research aptitude is crucial. Some get a natural aptitude for research, but many need to consciously develop a good aptitude. That is something both supervisor and student should understand. Research motivation is another factor. Many are naturally inclined and some are passionate about research. But many need to be trained and schooled by their supervisors. Friends play a big role in this. Good research motivated friends will encourage a person during disappointments and discouragements which happen many times during one's research career.
Greetings
Dks
03/08/25, 4:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 794
Let me look at the physical expansion taking place in iisc in that period 1967 to 70 and its impact on the overall physical ambience . 
IISc had lots of open spaces and most buildings had a lot of in - between spaces . It looked like a small forest with many flowering  trees and birds.Most earlier buildings were made of dressed stone. The main building and adjoining department buildings - physics, IPC, biochemistry- provided a majestic ambience and the large open area in front and behind the main building gave a large appearance. It looked great. 
I used to see many buildings with lots of open spaces all around it in Malleswaram and I realised  that it is the standard planning of the old Mysore government . Later when I visited Mandya , I found that almost all office buildings, hospitals and educational institutions had an offset of more than 100 to 200 meters. You see the buildings constructed after a large open space with buildings and trees. Gardens with  flowering plants were to be found here and there and not in all such spaces. The importance was on trees - fruit trees and flowering trees and not on plants. The town planning and these spaced out constructions were planned and implemented by Sir M Visweswariah. 
But that scene was changing rapidly in Bangalore also.. Most big houses gave way for crowded apartments. This started in the late seventies and by the nineties ,Malleswaram had many apartments changing the face of a serene series of bungalows.  A similar situation started at the institute campus also. 
Our serene and open campus  was getting slowly eroded with new constructions being taken up in many places . This pace of construction increased with years and now has reached demonic proportions. It is converting that great institute into a slum. The greatest misfortune was that IISc didn't have a master plan earmarked areas for departments, hostels, residences, service units. Most decisions are localised and adhoc. Let me give two examples :
I wanted a separate place for the new 66kv / 11kv substation in 1986. The existing 11kv incoming supply from KEB to IISc was located north of the then aerospace department.  But that was not suitable for the new substation. I wanted a place in the south . The space opposite to CEDT was given to us.  CEDT protested saying they don't have expansion space. The reason is the absence of a masterplan that reserved space for expansion of departments. 
The second was the request by CES to the space near our new 66kv  substation. Fortunately, I heard about it and immediately told the director that I need the space for expansion of the substation. This happened in 1999 and IISc agreed to my proposal for an integrated and centralised DG unit connected to the grid . So we used that space for the DG centre in 2001. See the myopic views of people. 
I can talk more about the lapses. I was made chair of the campus development ,but I saw the breakdown of our suggestions even before the ink was dry.  Violation of rules was and is common in IISc.  
The non availability of a masterplan made adhoc decision making and that led to chaotic developments in the campus. The developments were such as to beat the famous Thuglakian approaches.
Greetings
Dks
04/08/25, 5:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 795

Let us look at the destruction of IISc's great rustic look. Some constructions started in 1968 onwards. We got a new estate officer. The power engineering building got two extensions at each end - one for EE and the other for Mechanical engineering.  Civil and hydraulics  also built a few extensions to the hydraulics lab . The HoD and office ,which were in the PE building, were  shifted to the civil engineering building. As I mentioned before, two new hostels and a new one for married students were ready by 1969. The new gymkhana building with grounds on the opposite side to the main campus and adjacent to the porcelain factory was also completed by then. 
A major development was the construction in the open space at the main entrance between the main building and the outside road going towards Mekri circle. Prof Choksi, who was the chairman of the council at that time , opposed any construction in that area. He was convinced that there would be  no construction in the large central space and two buildings were approved at both ends - one with three lecture halls , Mathematics department and Choksi hall and another with 16 classrooms. Both buildings were ready by 1970. This was the first attack on open spaces and buildings coming up in the so-called between spaces. Another example is organic chemistry building constructed in the space ,sandwiched between biochemistry and IPC. The great open space ambience between buildings was slowly getting reduced. Newer roads were not broad enough and didn't have good drainage . I felt one big vacuum in the institute was  in not having a lake inside the campus. There was no water body in the campus. 
While the institute had a lot of open spaces and a lot of greenery , the botanist father of Mrs Dhawan was consulted for planting more trees. He in 1967 identified many areas. Institute maintained its pristine and natural ambience till mid seventies. Even during the construction, Prof Dhawan was particular that no trees should be cut. So land was carefully identified for construction. But all that changed now.
There is no unified architecture. Walking in footpaths with bushy plants closeby,  encountering snakes on the path or corridors of the building,hearing the  squeaking bird voices,  cool summers,  calm atmosphere, lights on in many buildings, particularly library,  even at midnight ,quiet hostels - these were the scenes of those years at the  IISc campus. Scenes in the city were also similar except for snakes. Walking inside the campus or outside was a great pleasure. One could sit and allow the serene and calm atmosphere envelope him or her. All that is a dream now. No fans were needed then even in the director's office. Bangalore was a “ no fan “ city then. I bought a fan ,that too a table fan, only in 1974. 
 It is painful for me, but inevitable for many. That is the world - ever changing and surprising.
Change means - destroy the old , bring in the new. Sometimes what we destroy is beauty and memory. 
Greetings
Dks
05/08/25, 4:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 796

There is a comment from Prof karunakara:
“Sir,
Very surprised to know that no master plan for developments even though there are many scholars at Institute and  no thoughts for future expansion.
Thanks and regards.”

My response
When I talked about masterplan, it was only with respect to land use. Normally, we reserve some parts of land for housing, some for commercial, some open space , some businesses ,some industries etc in each city. This is what was known as town planning, but these plans were not followed. Sir MV didn't anticipate industries in Bangalore and so our roads were narrow compared to Mysore . The growth was not anticipated. 
When I said the master plan for IISc, I was talking about the land use plan for expansion, not about academic directions.  There is a reason for this. IISc didn't expand very much till the sixties. It started expanding at a higher rate from 1970 onwards adding several centres or units every year. Till 1990 many buildings came up in the campus and there were lots of discussions. Because of the uncertain situations, we didn't have space for expansions.  That led to lots of discussions.  This foresight for expansion was missing for land use. 
I should clarify that this type of construction led to haphazard growth of buildings . At no point in time,  IISc considered vertical growth. 
But it should be clarified that the growth of IISc was not hindered by land use. IISc grew academically at the highest rate in India. It was done by adding more buildings and stressing the land use.  That was the best feasible method economically and financially. Only by 2005, we got more funds to demolish older hostel blocks and construct newer hostels with more floors. Similarly we started shifting biology departments to the backside near D gate . Later even Aerospace was shifted out. So IISc growth went on unimpeded without hiccups.  We found alternate solutions. 
My comment was on the haphazard construction of additions during 1985 to 2000. At no point did I hint that IISc had no road map for academics. IISc constantly endeavoured to be on the forefront of the latest emerging areas. The faculty came up with new areas , got funding and put up buildings , bought equipment and faculty and ran programs. To give one instance, during the three years tenure of Prof Ramaseshan ten new centres were established and a new supercomputer education centre was set up. So we were moving forward in the academics and research front with no hindrances but with lots of support and encouragement. 
All I said was that we didn't have a land use plan which would have minimized some amount of adhocism.  That is all. Sorry that it gave a wrong view. Thanks, Karunakara for the opportunity to clarify that aspect and bring in a correct perspective to the tremendous growth of IISc. 
Greetings 
Dks
06/08/25, 5:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 797
There are three more comments. 
Mr Murali :
“Yes water body is a must for big campus”
My response 
IISc promised to let rain water go to Sankey tank in the beginning years of IISc.   So it couldn't build a lake on campus.  That is the reason for not having a water body in the campus. But our water consumption is very high. We should have treated used water. We didn't do that. 
Prof Vasudev Parvati 
“Sir, any comments on the Centre for Brain Research and other Medical related facilities coming up at IISc? Wouldn't it be better if such research were left to AIIMS and more focus be given at the Institute for advanced research in technical areas?”
My response 
Brain research is an important area which needs a multidisciplinary approach to solve many problems. There are many departments in IISc dealing with several cellular, biological, nano, molecular , modeling, computing  and AI areas and this has led to many good publications . So the centre for brain research is a good area and IISc is in a position to provide holistic solutions ,not a medical or psychological solution. We can move away from a disease oriented approach towards an understanding and discovery approach. So it is a welcome development. 
As regards medical education , it is a disastrous decision to start undergraduate courses in medicine.  It will divert IISc from research to operational aspects and dilute attention to many departments.  We may end up with financial problems. 

Prof. Karunakara
“Thanks. I was thinking how such a prestigious institution of our country grown with no clear plans. Thanks for details.  
But still a question is haunting to me is,  what we are lacking to  meet to the level of  Noble laureates. 
Regards.”
My response
The reasons why we didn't get nobel prizes are many like
Equipment not available. Raman gave the highest salary to his glass blower. He could do his experiments with simple devices . The situation is different now. 
Normally Nobel comes for indepth research. That is missing . Many got FRS . Some worked with Nobel winners. 
Nobel needs extensive work at a fundamental level. Many times it is done by groups. Fundamental research is still weak. Most work at IISc is applicative. 
Peer support with other Nobel winners is poor. 
Awareness of our work, continuity of work are poor. Normally Nobel is awarded only after some applications are developed by others . So we are missing this continuity. 
Nobel is relevant to only two disciplines in IISc- physics and chemistry.  Even the Nobel to AI researcher this year is given for physics. 
Work in India doesn't get known and applied in other countries. 
To conclude, a lot of research activities  going on at IISc are of high quality -definitely  at Nobel level as can be seen from publications in major journals of repute and many international honours and awards.
Greetings 
Dks
07/08/25, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 798

I am glad about  your interest in IISc and the quality of research . Thank you. 
 Let me look at my next topic -  the freedom of work in general and at IISc in particular  and its erosion and the rise of the power of admin over academics, a very dangerous trend from which  the country is suffering even now. 
First I propose the necessary conditions for a good , non toxic , sustainable  and successful working atmosphere which  are:
1.openness and transparency- well defined goals, purposes, rules,and procedures and processes. Regular bulletins , discussions. Dynamic changes. Awareness of different aspects of the organization 
2.freedom from fear . Happy and non stressed atmosphere.  Well defined responsibility and ownership. 
3.good and calm ambience conducive for working by people. Good connectivity and access. Fairness and just decisions.
4.empathy and people centric 
5.primary focus or goals established clearly by management- this is crucial for academics to be in the forefront. Admin should work for this purpose and not for misinterpreted rules. Rules can be modified . Rules are not gods. Many organizations build rules and don't change them . Rules shouldn't  be rigid. 
6. Participatory work culture and decision making. Primacy of ethics.
7. Very low management control. 
Decentralization and empowerment of small teams. The key aspects are - planning, strategies, regular  feedbacks, advisory committees,  reviews by external experts , changes and implementations, etc. All aspects are crucial today. 
9. High degree of satisfaction for all - faculty, students , employees . 
10. Egalitarian, helping and supporting ethos.
11. This is the most important aspect for leadership - futuristic anticipation, thinking and vision . Remember leadership in academic institutions is diffused . It includes several people - management council, director or VC or principal , HoDs, deans, senate, advisory committees , external reviewers etc. 

I find many universities in the US and England follow many of  these conditions for governance ,but not in India. Private institutions have adhoc ,fearful dictatorships in most cases. Public institutions belonging to the state are politically controlled. I find autonomous and aided institutions slightly better. 
What needs to be done to meet most of the above 11 conditions ? Let me identify some basic requirements:
Define purpose , goals, vision, mission etc which are achievable,  relevant and meaningful. Have a futuristic thinking. 
Define the overall intent of the management. Develop a conducive intent. Mindset management is tough.
Prepare policies for governance,  ethics, operations, 
Define processes, feedbacks, reviews etc. Allow flexibility, changes .Allow reviews by external experts. Involvement of external experts in many activities like PhD evaluation, faculty selection ,lab development,  lectures and conferences has many advantages and provides fairness and transparency .
Capability and capacity building methods
Documentation to a good level. Open access to people. 
Positive attitude with all. 
Decentralise leadership , control, and empowerment.  

Greetings
Dks
08/08/25, 5:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 799
“As to methods, there may be a million and then some, but principles are few. The man who grasps principles can successfully select his own methods. The man who tries methods, ignoring principles, is sure to have trouble.”
RALPH WALDO EMERSON, ESSAYIST AND POET

Let me ask - what is the situation at IISc?
IISc operates on a few major unwritten principles . Let me list some.
1.in quest of excellence- is our goal
2.primacy to academics and research. Admin to support academics 
3. Forward and futuristic looking. 
4. Be in the forefront of areas and be prepared to move forward. 
5. Socially helpful research and development
6. Assist the  institutions in the country.
It scores high on all the above - a very high value - except for admin delays. IISc is  not only built on the eleven conditions mentioned in the previous post , but also followed them and changed them ,for over  a century  - a long history . Importantly, IISc never thought and thinks that rules are  permanent, rigid and interpreted in one way. It had several mechanisms to build rules and change them as well as give new interpretations. It keeps on building new mechanisms . It is dynamic and agile , giving serious thought and discussions on every change. It transformed at regular intervals. It never hesitated in experimentation One great feature of IISc is:
“Every person can initiate a change in its goals, purpose, processes and rules. Everyone thinks about changes and improvements.”  It is a 21st century people centric agile entity, a rarity in India, even in the 20th century.   
Admin was subordinate to academics. Academics controlled the rules and processes. All rules are framed by committees of academics and approved  by the higher level bodies like senate and council.
Let me talk about our students' admission process . It saw several changes in evaluation . We talked about inter university variability. We decided in the late sixties itself that university marks are not good indicators of merit. So we decided that the entrance exam is one reliable  route for uniform assessment and ranking. We were clear that interviews is a necessary method to assess the thinking capabilities of students. So we retained the interview system for admissions to research. Our learning mechanism was continuous and participative with all faculty involved in the discussions during the two joint faculty meetings held every year to decide on admissions processes and later to ratify the admissions. We used to have discussions on the learnings - problems faced and solutions found. It was a great experience . 

 We have dynamic thinking and agile structures. Prof Dhawan introduced participative decision making and operations through the concept of committees with academic members. These committees can change the rules, provide paths and directions. They controlled the  admin. It was a great system and many IITs followed this system.
We operated through several committees . Some are: 
Promotions and assessments committee
Buildings and works committee 
Senate committees - research, curriculum .
campus amenities committee - i was a member and chair of this committee for many years.
Time table committee - I was a coordinator for three years. 
Central evaluation committee with many subcommittees - I chaired this committee til my retirement. 
Grievance committee- i was it's member and later chair for two years
Extension lecture committee - I was a member and coordinator of this committee. 
Executive committees - this was introduced by Prof Ramaseshan for streamlining two major support centres- library and computer centre. I did a swot analysis for the computer centre and later was a leading member of the executive committee.  
Greetings 
Dks
09/08/25, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 800

IISc's growth was continuing all these years.
It was the best in the sixties ,seventies and eighties . The era of Prof Dhawan,  was a golden era for IISc,  its growth and prominence and relevance to the country. He built an active, open ,participative, future proofed  and thinking campus , a great place to work. After him, Prof Ramaseshan became the director . He built the institute with scientific vision and took it to greater heights. But he was weak in admin. He took Prof Ramakrishna as his admin in charge. He was totally ineffective. His control of admin was poor and non-existent. So the admin grew and grabbed the power. These admin  changes came after the  eighties.  
Today what we  have  is an  auditors governance , L1 purchases and very strict and time consuming financial pre approvals .  This disease afflicted us at IISc in the mid seventies. This is killing research, innovation , and progress in India. We need to make the admin subordinate to a set of goals or vision or main purpose of an institution and not make them demigods. But the opposite is happening.  I am writing this with deep anguish. 
Let me look at the situation at IISc now. 
In addition to the natural,  pristine and beautiful campus, ours had a complete academic atmosphere at that time- 1965 to 70 -  with most admin powers  rested with  the departments . Admin offices were a few, dealing with admissions, scholarships, salary, bills and council section - that is it  . So the admin was subordinate to academics, an ideal situation. Freedom to work and get chemicals and equipments were excellent. There were no delays.  But this ideal situation didn't continue . Actually it started feeling turbulence frequently.
 During the tenure of Bhagawantam as director, AG Pai as registrar wielded the power ,director becoming powerless , and there were no additions to faculty, no new departments, no promotions , just a total stagnation . But AG Pai was efficient and didn't increase the admin influence away from the HoDs. That meant that HoDs power was still high and they controlled the department. But the institute's  growth suffered at a time when the institute was celebrating its golden jubilee. 

Prof Dhawan was doing his best to rebuild the institute through a series of reforms. 
But a tragedy - a hindrance to academics and a domination of admin over everything - started with Prabhu during the mid sixties and seventies. He tightened his grip and made the admin supreme. 
Greetings 
Dks
10/08/25, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 801
What I am writing is my views of the dynamic changes that happened in IISc for about 60 years. It may not be a full or complete view but facts are correct - no fudging there. Let me look at the fast growth of admin at IISc.  But a word of caution. IISc has a lot of resilience. It absorbs changes  , adapts to a different state and excels in academics. Its principles are intact - no changes there .

Prabhu , the registrar in the sixties and the early seventies   wanted more control . He started his “grabbing the power" campaign in 1968 -69 with a conference of registrars of most centrally governed institutions including IITs.  It was the first major think tank on academic admin. But its aftereffects were not desirable. Power moved away from academics to admin. This was needed to some extent. But the balancing between tasks and delegation and decision making was not easy. 
He planned deviously to increase his power and admins stronghold on the working of the institute. He created a concept of dividing the administration into several units. From three sections, he converted admin to 11 units and kept on expanding admin. He built in centralised approvals for all expenditure. Purchases and stores were centralised. More admin officers were appointed and the admin became power hungry and top heavy . They had to create work and so started obstructing scientific work.

The effect was disastrous. The registrars, who succeeded Prabhu,  and their officers lived by rules. They never understood the following :
What should be their role? 
Why does the institute exist? 
What should be the main purpose of the institute and the directions of the institute?
They don't understand that institute directions are not top down ,but come from every direction and from outside. That is very difficult for admin , who are accustomed to a central command structure , to understand. But directors and professors  commanded the institute irrespective of admins role. But that is the essence of IISc.  
What is the importance of timely decisions and what are the effects of time delays on research ? 
How do you move from personalised admin to a general purpose and highly efficient and effective admin? 
How does digital technology help them in speeding up their work? 

The one effect of admin control is that  everything was delayed. Papers sent for approvals were misplaced. Time limits were not fixed for clearances. Admin resisted computerization for long. Only payroll was computerised but not properly. Departments found ways to tackle this delay and disappearance diseases. 
Every department had assigned a person to chase their  papers as a few papers sent for approval to the central office disappeared. Later we introduced an organized campus mail system.Similarly , every lab had assigned  a lab assistant to chase the progress of purchases.  I don't think any directors tried to reverse this trend. Prof CNR Rao helped many in a selective manner by overcoming  the decisions of the admin through discretionary powers . 
 Directors are getting entangled in rules and haven't come out of the rules. The only - but major and very important- thing is that our academics - curriculum, teaching , research ,labs development, degrees, new area development , faculty selection and promotion etc - are still with the faculty and handled by committees and the senate. The admin plays a subordinate role and listens to the deans. But not so with general admin - purchases, bills, finance, approvals etc. 
Greetings 
Dks
11/08/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 802

True the admin increased its role slowly and steadily from the seventies in IISc.  That looks like a general trend in the country due to the 
Increased legal , fiscal and audit regulations of the government.  Those governmental oversight , audit interference and legal attacks are destroying the country. Egos and arrogance coupled with ignorance are a deadly cocktail of destruction . They don't allow the country to grow, to flourish and to be really free . I don't know when we will experience total freedom in India . Hundreds of regulatory, law,taxes  police and audit agencies attack us - both individuals and institutions. The governments think that all of us are thiefs.
Why am i writing about iisc? To show a dynamic picture of growth , impediments and their resolutions , improvements and reforms as seen by me. 
But some get the impression that IISc is a difficult place. Please remove that idea. IISc is still the best place in India or anywhere to live and work providing the maximum individual and academic freedom with a great satisfying life. There are a few hiccups that are minor aberrations. Our reforms progressed over years and decades. One aspect was that the power of HoDs was reduced . There is a stronger level of democracy in the departments. That credit goes to Prof Dhawan in creating a few new structures . Let me list them. 
He built a new concept called divisions. He combined several departments into one unit and called it a division. He created four divisions and  named them as physical sciences, chemical sciences, mechanical sciences and electrical sciences. He appointed senior professors to head each division. Their main task was organizing  faculty promotions.  He also created a committee of professors in each department entrusted with policy decisions and faculty promotions. 
He built a centralised senate curriculum committee to decide on structures of curriculum of departments. He set up a time table committee to devise the institute-wide timetable for all departments. Both committees had representations to all departments. He also made the departments set up departmental committees to operationalise the new credit system in 1970. Then we also had a grading advisory committee which functioned for about ten years.
So he ensured the isolation of academics from admin and avoided the necessity of ad hoc decision making . He inculcated and encouraged participatory systems. So academic freedom was ensured . But the admin created many hurdles in our day to day functioning. 
   Rajaji talked of licence permit Raj. But most government and semi government organizations suffered from another disease - audit torture.   I want to look at one issue of audit which created a major headache for me. 
This happened in the 1983 -84 period. Prof Ramaseshan was the director then. He was working on a plan for a supercomputer centre. He said he was dreaming about it. He evinced a lot of interest in improving the computing infrastructure in the institute and I was involved in his reforms from the beginning in various activities . We had several rounds of discussions with many committees and senior government officials from the US .
I decided to seek  additional power requirements from KEB as it takes time to get the additional power. That was objected to by CAG afterwards . We had to spend days convincing him about the need. He threatened us . Finally it got resolved.
Greetings 
Dks
12/08/25, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 803
Let me look at two comments. 
Prof Vasudev Parvati
“Sir, if this is the case in IISc, please think of the plight of private educational institutions where management keeps a tight grip on administrative issues and money. It's very difficult to expect any quality research work in such situations, except where researchers are capable of getting external funding. Even there, many managements demand a cut in the funds for ' facilities provided '
What is the way out?”
My response
Thanks Vasudev. It is an important question occurring to many. Many feel that we can't reach IISc level and forget about it. Many told me this. There are many who feel IISc and IITs are doing great because they get large financial grants from the government.  There are some others who feel and say that IISc is doing well because it gets the best students. All these are myopic views . Most are like the blind men defining an elephant by feeling a part of it. I call the disease prevailing with most as the excuse disease - everything is fine with me. Others are preventing my institution from achieving the higher status of a good one,  forget the urge to becoming a great or excellent institution. This disease is visible in your query itself . 
Let me explain in two parts , the first part about IISc. I am glad you gave me an opportunity to clarify my comments. Have no doubt about the fact that IISc is doing well. 

All institutions are not static . They meet many challenges. There are regulatory changes , new compliances, market realities , import restrictions, uncertainties etc. Most indian institutions can't admit a large number of foreign students . So the diversity is limited. Diversity helps in broad and open thinking. Diversity is in two dimensions - wrt to students and second the exposure of faculty to many different institutional cultures. I will explain more on this later.
Success of an institution depends on meeting these  challenges , and not running away. That is the problem with your normal colleges and the big difference with IISc.  
So I did not write about the difficulties of IISc.  Also I didn't  say that these difficulties threatened our progress. i actually gave instances of our attacking these problems and solving them and marching on without diluting our firm academic and research commitments. We were and are very successful for maintaining our ethos for more than a century - not an easy task. We met challenges headon and found solutions and implemented them. We were constantly on the look out for improvements.  
The cocktail for success used by IISc contains the following factors and characteristics: 
Agility
Resilience
High visionary and multilevel leaderships 
Participation , commitment and ownership.- no excuses.
Openness
Free thinking and free working without fear or hindrance
Futuristic outlook 
No class system. 
So IISc is moving forward and never felt any issue as unsolvable. I was discussing the way we evolved over periods of uncertainty , changes , modernism and kept pace. I wasn't writing to criticise IISc.  
I discussed our ways of building new structures, and dynamic changes in rules. Participative opportunities through the large number of committees that governed IISc were provided to a large number of faculty members both senior and junior. That built a vast pool of thinkers and leaders and motivated most faculty. The system was open, fair and transparent. External experts' involvement is good. Many of these are missing in our colleges.
Let me look at your main question and concern in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
13/08/25, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 804
Your concern :
Your query is oriented towards excuses. Even IISc faculty get external funding for research. But I will ask a different question.  
Why are many  other institutions not growing?
What are the reasons ?
Let me try to answer these based on my exposure - interactions with 1000s of faculty members in hundreds of engineering colleges through many programs like 
The SPP program of KSCST
The approval program of AICTE 
The accreditation by NBA
The audit and mentor program of TEQIP
Selection of faculty by many colleges
Several Short term courses
and 
My involvement with conducting courses and lectures. I will use these extensive experiences spanning four decades to answer the query. 
The primary reason for stagnation by engineering colleges is 
The abdication by faculty to own the discipline. This is the most unfortunate thing. Most faculty define their job as just teaching some course and  do their job not with their passion but as a duty and ignore participation in the growth of themselves and the institution.
 The faculty are the primary growth engine for an institution . They failed in most cases. Good and motivated faculty were subjugated by sycophants.  
Many faculty live in fear, feeling of unfairness and finding excuses for not doing anything IISc is doing. For instance, we did a lot for schools by different processes. Many are voluntary activities . For instance, about 10 of us initially started the extension lecture program for school students . We conducted about 200 lectures per year with 30 faculty participating in it. It was run for more than thirty years as a voluntary work without any remuneration and travelling by bus to most places. That was dedication to help education. I didn't see similar experiments by any college . Prof Vankudre tried some community radio programs  and Prof Shinde conducted training for jail inmates as a TEQIP activity. But most institutions didn't do much on this front. 
Wherever faculty in sizable numbers showed interest, motivation and the urge to grow , the institutions have done well. Determination by every  faculty member to grow academically as an individual and consequently for the institution is essential for success. Some faculty are genuine, have the determination and the institutions have moved from a satisfactory level to a good level. But none moved to a great level. That is a tragedy. 
But there is an opposite positive indication. The entire computer science program was handled by faculty getting into learning and teaching CS courses and later IT courses and now AI courses. It is commendable . The entire IT revolution happened because of these efforts. I should record my appreciation for this effort by faculty in engineering colleges. 
But faculty didn't get involved with admin or academics or future growth with vigor. 
More in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
14/08/25, 5:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 805
There are two comments. 
“Looking forward to the next post.
The mindset of the owners of many private colleges are very different except about 10. (SSN College of engineering, Mepco and so on.) My exposure is only to engineering colleges of Tamilnadu.
Infrastructure, Quality of staff and students ,placement numbers and accreditation place an important role  in many private institutions. Tuition fees are high in private engineering colleges.
If  Government and Universities have the same fee structure in all colleges (attached to the Universities like ANNA university,) we can compare.
I have yet to come across accreditation panel with one or two professors from private engineering colleges.”
The second one
Professor,
Truly said, and I would quote the following excerpt:

_" ... The faculty are the primary growth engine for an institution . They failed in most cases. Good and motivated faculty were subjugated by sycophants. Many faculty live in fear, feeling of unfairness and finding excuses for not doing anything ..."_

“This is a growing problem in many second-tier and third-tier private engineering colleges. Teachers have to deal with a heavy workload along with many compliance requirements. This leaves them with very little time or energy to try new ideas. As a result, teaching often stays limited to lecture notes that have been used for years, passed from one college to another, and from one batch to the next, without much change. Many batches of students simply use the previous year’s notes, and in the end, they learn very little beyond what is needed to pass exams.

The problem becomes worse with the way question papers are set. In many cases, if a student memorises answers from previous years’ question papers, they can score high marks without really understanding the subject. On the other hand, a sincere student who studies the course material but does not look at past questions may get fewer marks, not because they lack knowledge, but because the system rewards guessing the pattern instead of truly learning. Most universities repeat their previous year questions - I don't have concrete proof of this for more than 2 universities, but I have heard of the same.

From my own experience as a student in different schools and colleges, I believe that an institution grows only when each batch of students is taught differently from the last, whether in theory or practical classes. While theory may have less scope for creativity, practical courses (and the practical parts of theory courses) should be taught in a more flexible and adaptive way. This is where real learning happens, and where we can break the cycle of memorisation and repetition.

If we want real improvement, colleges must review their teaching and exam methods. Faculty should be encouraged and given time to update their content, experiment with practical work, and set question papers that truly test understanding. Small, consistent changes can make a big difference in how students learn, and in how institutions grow.”
My response 
These two comments tell us the need for  one important change - change the mindsets from negative, excuses oriented to a  positive mindset - we should be prepared to meet the challenges,and  find a consensus solution. We shouldn't use these problems as excuses for not doing our best. 
Remember that no system is perfect,  every system has defects. 
First do an ABC analysis and  understand the factors that influence the success of an institution in a big way. Students evaluation has low priority. Management support is essential ,but not the primary factor. Faculty can't absolve itself of its role in building an institution. 
I already said that success depends on how an institution meets the challenges. Faculty workload is there in successful institutions also. It is not unique to only unsuccessful private institutions. I have heard that argument many times. There is no excuse to a faculty in not upgrading his knowledge regularly. He or she can't stagnate. The primary role of a faculty member is to upgrade his or her knowledge by getting interested to know what is happening in his field in  other universities, how others teach courses, what are the new developments in his area , what new areas areas are developing , and reading books and papers , attending courses, improving the courses taught by him or her, doing research, discussing with other faculties and students and knowing the societal problems in his city or state etc. Is this happening? Why don't many  faculty members upgrade their knowledge ? Instead of talking about exams , please address your improvement. Be positive. Find out ways of changing management intentions. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
15/08/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 806

How do we solve the first hurdle of faculty rejuvenation in engineering colleges?
Instead of talking about difficulties, let us look constructive and look for solutions. 
Instead of finding excuses , colleges should face this problem squarely and find a new solution. The 21st century saw the industries reinventing first with digital applications and infusions in the first two decades and now with AI infusions. Otherwise industries will die. It was a problem of survival. 
Similarly it is a problem of survival for colleges to rejuvenate and reinvent . Cosmetic solutions like internships are not enough. Wake up and restrategise education. Faculty energization is the first priority to improve colleges. Remember this is a tough task ,an almost impossible task ,some may say. 
Build several new and imaginative  structures to motivate the faculty, to encourage them, to create networking , to build a modern  dynamic curriculum and to conduct socially applicative research . Involve external experts. Bring them out of their built cocoons. Break these cocoons. I will first talk about motivation and then about the cocoons we humans  build. 
Motivate a core group of faculty,  prepare a plan of action, prepare a complete set of dos and don'ts for the faculty , build annual reviews and self assessments , and reinvent courses. 
Start with breaking some beliefs and building confidence.  
Ask - is IISc doing better than the colleges because of funds? 
The answer is no. 
See the commitment, passion, enthusiasm  and energy of the faculty at IISc. Why don't the faculty in colleges come half way to that level ?  Also remember that IISc faculty get equal or less salary than the faculty of a college. So come out of the Maya- unrealistic delusions to the reality of the faculty motivation. It is urgent for the survival of the faculty themselves. Business as usual is dead. 
Faculty needs to be 
Motivated to do their job with sincerity - ban text book reading in the class room as a lecture, ban copying from text books in their ppts, conduct evaluation properly , answer questions etc. Forget the current mode of lecturing by a faculty. 
Reinvent teaching a course with not lectures but with many more components like 
Reading , abstractions   critiquing, discussions,  , case studies, problem solving, applications, project work, question answer sessions, talks by students, expert talks , industry talks etc . Make It mandatory.
To assist the faculty   the colleges should prepare a format for each course containing the following - 
references.,
Goal of the course, expectations, complete evaluation scheme ,
a lecture schedule with complete details  and topics 
Problem sheets 
List of projects , experiments, term papers etc.
Google group or WhatsApp group for interactions
Discussion topics
Suggested books to read 
Futuristic trends .

Second , prepare a five year  plan of expectations  for each faculty - 
It should have the following components :
What are the courses that a  faculty member will teach for the next five years - at least two courses in a new area ?
What are the shortcomings and the consequent improvements in the course he or she  is teaching ?
What are the new courses he she wants to attend every year? 
What are the readings a faculty should be doing in the five years - some goals like three books per year?
What are the research topics he or she wants to work on ? Goals on publications. 
What is the new area he or she wants to take up and what are the preparations required? Goal is to take up  at least one emerging area in 5 years. 
Create opportunities to expose faculty to the current happenings . Conduct  online talks  by  experts in a new area atleast twice a week. Why do seminars , a common occurrence at IISc,  don't happen in the colleges ? Start discussion societies to discuss one technical problem each week. AI applications is a good starting point. AI impacts is another. AI directions is a third. 
Get involved with society. There are hundreds of problems in our  society - our cities, villages, schools, colleges, people, our utilities, resources, wastes, apartment management etc. Why not involve faculty to solve local, state, country level problems. Start with a social engineering program. Initiate innovative projects. 
Transformations engineering is another area.
Build startups. Faculty should be in the forefront, not leave it to the students. 

Who will do this rejuvenation ?
It should be a combined effort by a group of motivated young faculty from several colleges to form a Forum , device ways of motivation and talk ,guide and advice faculty members. College managements also deserve to be addressed by this forum. FAER can help in this. 
Greetings
Dks
15/08/25, 7:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Today is independence day. I was born before independence,  saw ignorance, poverty , slavery and peace and satisfaction in those days. I remember independence day celebration in my village school in 1949. 
I saw progress in education  , power, agriculture happening post independence.  But I don't see real freedom of free thinking, hard work , free from negative and excuse minded approach even now. While appreciating our independence and celebrating independence day, let us resolve to remove the slavery in our mind and fly high with positive thinking and purposeful ,fruitful living. 
Happy independence day to all.
Greetings 
Dks
16/08/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 807

The next reason is 
Excuses, low confidence and diffidence amongst faculty. Your query itself reveals excuses. Why do you blame management .Why not solve it. AICTE and TEQIP helped the institutions . But the faculty didn't take it forward. This belief in excuses should be attacked. Faculty lack pride in their jobs or have limited range and vision. Thinking negatively prohibited them from thinking positively. 
Faculty confidence needs to be built up. Faculty should break their borders and go beyond just teaching and get involved in their institution. 
Faculty didn't educate the management. Faculty were timid to discuss seriously with the management and oppose their views. I have seen many managements helping in the growth and providing funds once convinced. Why did most faculty shy away from this important and essential task. 
If managements are not well intentioned, it is the job of faculty to educate them through various ways. I have helped in giving shock treatment to managements. My involvement with the managements  of hundreds of colleges is very positive. There were a few money minded persons - it is natural they have to run the institution ,they can't put in more personal money. No faculty member generates revenue for the institution in my experience. More than 40% of our revenue at IISc is generated by our faculty through sponsored projects and consultancies. 

The third reason is 
Lack of leadership - driven by fear, most leaders have become followers. This is a big malady. Most principals spent time doing routine jobs and firefighting. They didn't plan for the future. They didn't know how to reach their goals. 
I sat in the room of the  principals of three or four colleges.  . Students were coming in one after another for some signatures mostly for trivial reasons. 
In one case, the principal was talking for 10 minutes with an employee who wanted a day's leave. Most principals love their power over the staff , faculty and students. Many don't delegate routine tasks to others. Most don't have strategic plans for the growth of their institution. Futuristic thinking is absent in most colleges. There are no structures for various functions in some colleges. Coteries consisting of a few people run some institutions. 
This lack of leadership is a big problem. 
I have seen a few dynamic forward thinking principals and a few courageous principals. I call MSRIT as having two stages - before Prof Prahlada Rao and after him. We saw good improvements there. 
Similarly Prof Holla changed RVCE into a good institution.  Prof AbhaiKumar  at TCE brought in many reforms . Prof KAK did improve SSIT. Prof MN Chennabasappa changed SIT into a good institution. Prof Ashok Shettar transformed BVB Hubli. Prof Viswanath set up standards in Gogte institute of technology. Prof NR Shetty built NMIT into a good institution. These are a few examples. But most institutions don't adapt and use their status of autonomy. Independent , free acting , involving faculty in decision making, openness , and forward thinking are traits to be built as cultures. Even many  NITs are in the state of an engineering college. They don't aspire to reach the level of an IIT. 
Where is the urge to improve, urge to transform , urge to move forward , urge to be in the front in a few areas? Until we have these cultures and urges , the colleges won't move forward and reach higher levels. Even the urge to get higher NIRF ranking is dying or reducing in many institutions. 
There are several institutions which broke away from the crowd and are doing well. Innovation and agility helped them. Some like UDCT, Galgotia, VIT, Nursee Monjee , Symbiosis, Amrita , etc are moving upwards. Jadavpur ,and  BE college were always serious about academics and research. That is how Roorkee moved up to become an IIT. 
Greetings 
Dks
16/08/25, 9:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy Sri Krishna Jayanthi. Let us remember him for giving us Bhagavad Gita , Mahabharata and Srimad Bhagavatam. Let us rejoice and remember the values in Gita.
Greetings  .
Dks
17/08/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 808

So far we discussed the question of how to upgrade a college to a higher level. 
Now let me see the reasons  why most colleges are at the low end of academics. There are some major problems here, not addressed by regulators. 
Let me look at some of them. 
Management awareness about education, their priorities  and their  intentions 
Academic culture -total  lack of it. Only those managements that had respect for academics prospered . 
Fear pervading amongst faculty.
Staff spying on faculty. 
Financial struggles.
No governance structures - run like a proprietary concern. This is again a serious problem. Managements operate on total adhocism and favoritism like a proprietary concern. I saw one chairman of a big college  asking his principal to shut up. I stood up immediately and said I am leaving and can't tolerate insults to faculty.  I have seen the bad treatment given by the managements to the retired IIT faculty employed by them. I saw the humiliation of many retired persons employed by private colleges. I know a person, who retired from ISRO and joined a college, was asked to canvass for the chairman who was contesting assembly elections. He quit the job.  Hence I decided that I won't join a college post retirement even though I got great offers from some big and well known managements.  I stayed away from employment by private colleges. 
Uniformity of treatment of faculty 
Faculty -  management discord or distrust. Both exist in their distinct domains .
Discriminatory treatment by regulatory agencies. 
It is strange that the regulatory agencies treat a private college- including its faculty - poorly, but when that management gets a university status , treatment changes. I can't understand this situation . Are agencies blind? 
I listed the nine problems above so that we understand what should be done to improve an institution as a first step. I haven't discussed the academic climb . Academic climb is focused on the motivation of the faculty, their urge to move forward and the development of a modern, relevant, balanced  and thinking curriculum . 
Many managements of engineering colleges are good and want to improve the education system. They need guidance. Principals should have vision, should be dedicated and practical and guide and use their faculty. They should educate the management without fear, delegate routine work to faculty, take collective decisions and build good teams with leadership skills. IISc excels because of commitment , leadership and collective , participative and open governance.  
There are positives which helped some institutions to grow up to higher levels. For many colleges, finance became easy after CS and IT became popular and admission requirements eased by AICTE and job opportunities increased . So it became necessary for colleges to have strong campus placements. So that resulted in some improvements in engineering education. Many managements learnt the art of academics . So the situation was better. Poorer institutions wound up. Financial markets played a role . 
That is the state today. We still have miles to go. 
Greetings 
Dks
18/08/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 809

Prof Karunakara has another comment:
“Good morning sir,
We have read that Indians were good in many fields of science during the vedic period, any attempt has been made at Institute to look it those aspects and better that knowledge? 
Thanks and regards 
Good day”
My response
You raised an important point that touches my nerves. I am anguished that Hinduism and our ancient literature were not understood and don't find a place in our universities and schools.
There are two issues with this. 
The first issue is knowing and understanding Hinduism.  That is a big confused thinking on Hinduism even now. What we know comes from German and British writers ,who are not experts and who didn't understand or interpret our literature correctly . They are biased . Their understanding of Hinduism can be summed up as
Hinduism is a religion like Christianity or Islam.  It believes in hundreds of gods. It is a primitive religion , not scientific , full of superstitions.
Aryans migrated from Europe and subjugated locals.
Sanskrit is derived from an ancient European language. 
Hinduism is built on castes. 
Hinduism is full of rituals and sacrifices. 
It is dominated by Brahmins.

Most educated Indians believed the above aspects and shunned studying the literature and banned it from our schools and universities.  
But unfortunately the above statements proposed by Europeans is more fiction. Hinduism is different . It is more than religion . It integrates religious practices like bhakti , meditation with living practices like samsara, artha ,kama, karma etc and with dharma - value systems like dos and don'ts,  order , sharing, non violence, harmony, society, respect for nature and animals, governance , organization etc. It is not a unitary religion - it doesn't accept the theory “ one size fits all” . It accepts that each person has different capabilities and interests and provides different paths - jnana, bhakti, yoga , karma etc. It understood that living needs multiple tasks , and so segregated people on tasks ,not on birth. It went into a higher level of philosophical analyses by many in different disciplines like nyaya, samkya, viseshika, yoga , mimamsa and vedanta . 
Hinduism realised that life needs knowledge and evolved many sciences based on Observations and reasoning. That is what is known as vedanta. Many sciences evolved during the vedic period. Unfortunately,  there is no understanding and appreciation of the above aspects by most academics.


Our education system distanced itself from Indian achievements for a long time. At the time of independence, there  was a strong force of communism sweeping the UK and its effects were felt in India. Most administrators of the Nehru era and most academics were great lovers of communist philosophy.  Both the British rulers and academics decried Indian knowledge systems. They destroyed our heritage by saying every aspect of Sanskrit literature is myth and there is no truth in it. Indian elite believed in it and propagated it. So Indian educators steered clear of ancient Indian writings. 
None of the school books contained anything about our earlier history and living. Indian history was Mughal history. I read a bit of British and a lot of Mughal history in school. 
There was a strong wind blowing against casteism . Caste was equated with hindu ancient thoughts . So religion and Indian ancient science and philosophy were banned from our education system. 
IISc is no exception to this rule. While some may talk about it, most debunked our role in mathematics.  It took us decades and centuries to show the world that Arabic numerals had their origin in India. We continued to use the term Arabic numerals. 
We are not aware of metallurgy, surgery, geometry, astronomy, Mathematics. Geology, etc studied during the vedic era. We don't teach aryabhattiyam , Bhaskaras Lilavathy , or other trastises written by Brahmagupta, varahamihira, Madhava, etc. We are not aware of the 160 schools of nyaya - logic or navya nyaya - new logic. 
That is a big tragedy. We ignore our history. 
I was sad that even the IISc faculty didn't appreciate our scientific development. 
I conducted an international conference in 1986 on knowledge representation in sanskrit . Many didn't like it. I ran a workshop on vedic mathematics. Two of my colleagues abused me. One of them said that we shouldn't be associated with such pseudo scientific activities. But I got support from a few others. 
Greetings 
Dks
19/08/25, 5:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 810

Prof Vinod Vyasulu reminises on vedanta:
“DKS, I've been thinking over your many posts on the vedanta which I found very illuminating. But the vedanta is one--the major--dharma. We have also those associated with Mahavira and the Jains, the Buddha, Basava, Sikh and possibly others I do not know. These are all home grown. Have probably intermingled over the years. Would you consider a series on some of these?”

My response
I had a long exposure to Sankaracharya,  Yajnavalkya,  upanishads , vedanta and vedas for many years through reading a large number of books written by Indians and foreigners, listening to many talks and discussions and contemplating for days and months. I have been studying vedanta since childhood .  So I was able to write about vedanta related to Hinduism. I still feel that vedanta is interpreted differently. Even swami Vivekananda calls it practical vedanta in order to make common people accept it. 
We assume there are six darshanas . Unfortunately , that is a broad classification. But there is more than what we see. There are hundreds of variations. Nyaya has about 160 schools. Even vedanta is not restricted to uttara mimansa. It exists in brahma sutra, upanishads and obviously in vedas. Vedas also had many variations. 
It means that there is no one unified view about vedanta. It is natural as our vedanta did emphasize on Brahman- the eternal all pervading permanent reality ,but vedanta discussed on many aspects of evolution, human body, mind, living, health, yoga , meditation, dhyana, turiya,  ethics, reasoning, intelligence, education, gurus, learning , viveka, language and grammar, Mathematics, geology, nature and environment, geometry, logic, proving hypotheses, metallurgy, heat transfer, energy and forces, infinity, completeness, Neti- negation , not this -  rule, governance, organization etc to name a few.  Again ,most modern commentators restricted themselves to a few topics like  materialism, God, duality or nonduality, etc. So a good and comprehensive understanding is missing. 
Since vedanta provides pluralistic and multidirectional views, there is a confusion. Buddhism definitely has many concepts common to vedanta but with different interpretations. Even vedantins didn't agree to one interpretation. That is why tarka and Purva mimamsa evolved to provide the foundations for arguments. 
I view Hinduism as a multidimensional architecture of principles, philosophies, ideas, practices encompassing many areas affecting nature, humans,society,  space, living, organization  with a great emphasis to understand all aspects of reality in all their manifestations. (I see that  It is not easy to understand this statement .) The focus is on correct perception and understanding with good clarity, discrimination, permanence  and enormity of thoughts. The enormity is really amazing . Recall the facts that
1 Hindus can conceive of very large numbers upto googol and beyond, and of very small fractions. They even numbered them. Vedas are full of numbers. 
2 Hindus declared that space is infinite , but everything in it is finite in time also. 
3.Evolution theory builds uncertainty in it. 
4.Natural forces are immense . Nomenclatures of various levels of natural forces of sun, wind, rain, earth are mind-boggling. 
5.Hinduism talks of frugal consumption , needed for a sustainable society. 
6. It talks of many noble thoughts-  vasudaiva kutumbakam, Lokas  Samastha  sukhino bhavantu  , tamasoma jyotir gamaya , satyam vada, ekam sat, shraddhaya deyam and many others .
Secondly, my knowledge of other religious theories is very minimal. So I am not competent to discuss those. I consider it not correct to discuss them as my biases will show up. 
Maybe someone better equipped can do justice to other Indian philosophies. 
Greetings 
Dks
20/08/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 811
S R Venkataramanan comments on my posts on ancient Indian science research at IISc:
“you’re right on!  you may want to point to the book ‘Pride of India’ published by samskRta bhaarati, contributed by several people knowledgable in science and samskRtam.  you may know Prof. Ramasubramanian of IIT-B (son of shri Krishnamurty Sastrygal) and he has several lectures on the contributions of bhaarata to science and how the half-backed british and other europeans mis-interpreted them and subsequently our lazy population consumed them instead of going to the source and developed such inferiority. Dr. Raj Vedam (has several you tubes and Ted speeches) is also another who has been debunking these western interpretation of sanaatana dharma and contributions of vedic period to ‘modern’ science and technology. there’s a lot of material now in public domain to point out how europeans ‘stole’ bhaaratiia contributions and put their name on them. e.g., boudhaayana suutram became ‘pythogorous theorem’, pingala’s work became work by ‘Fibanacci’, etc. unfortunately, even after knowing these NCERT never cares to revise our school textbooks to update those euro centric materials, or still has resistance from ‘interested’ parties. there are still some people from bhaaratam who knowingly refuse to accept the contribution of bhaaratam to science and technology with a different agenda in mind. the more i learn about those works in vedic and post-vedic (pre mugal and european) periods of bhaaratam, i feel anguished and angry about how bad i have been taught in school. the only way i can quiesce is to talk about these and tell our own people from bhaaratam about some of our achievements and point them to some of the sources available now to read about them. oh, well....”

My response
Thanks.  
But there is a lot of diffidence amongst people about the contributions of ancient Indians to science. We should see why this is so ? 
There are many reasons . 
The first reason we need to look at is the question: how does one accept a new concept like gravity , atoms, germs or cells or computers etc? 
It is a multiple sequential and parallel paths. But the most important reason is the acceptance by academics. If a concept is accepted by academics it gets accepted by people and gets into the curriculum. That didn't happen with Indian contribution to science. 

The first step is a uniformly acceptable view presented to academics and accepted by them. This process is an intense one, going through many stages - publications of findings is the first step , followed by conference presentations and lectures to peer groups in different universities. This will be followed by discussions and researchers getting involved with the discovery. Once the publications reach a critical size, the concept gets accepted and becomes part of the curriculum. That is an involved process. We don't have a similar process and can't expect a similar process. But conferences and lecture series will help. 

Most physicists accept the findings of Newton, Pascal, Faraday, Einstein ,Max Born , Niels Bohr and propagate them in their lectures. That is how science achieved a dominant place in our society. There are scientists who did great research work . There are teachers who propagate these inventions to students. There are people who admire science without understanding. 
While Physics is a few centuries old, cell biology is recent and we see the same model in its growth and acceptance. Medicine despite hurdles of correct understanding grew by leaps despite struggles by Pasteur , Semmelweis, Lister, Robert Koch and acceptance of germ theories and a simple concept like washing hands 
Let us continue further in the next post. 
Greetings. 
Dks
21/08/25, 4:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 812

Let me discuss the process of acceptance based on my experiences. 
Most of us think that an academic's role is in teaching and research. Many follow that approach. But there is another important role for academics - to prove and accept a new idea or concept and to find faults with a concept and force its death. As I said before, not all academics get involved in this. Normally ,people in the related disciplines become curious and analyse and experiment to find many realities of the new concept. But many academics conjecture futuristic scenarios. It is done regularly. 
When do we do it ? It normally happens every day while going for coffee. The morning coffee is a ritual necessity and normally we go in groups of faculty. I used to go with my contemporary colleagues , my seniors for coffee. That is the time for a lot of discussions.  We used to discuss contemporary developments, relevance of new areas like remote sensing and possible future predictions . I also joined other groups from other departments. These discussions helped in evolving new activities and programs.  One discussion culminated in a new discipline called physical engineering. People gave their views freely , argued passionately in these discussions. Another series of discussions led to setting up ASTRA.  Even joint programs emanated from these discussions. Sometimes the discussions led to fierce  arguments. 
I was fortunate to grow with an emerging discipline - computers - from 1962 onwards. I saw new concepts coming in regularly like organization, hardware , logic , programming, numerical methods, data , software , networking, Internet,  etc. So I had lively discussions on computers with many other faculty in the institute. 

During the sixties and even part of the seventies , computer meant only hardware. I was working on numerical methods to solve large problems with thousand plus variables. They can't be solved analytically. But still mostly faculty felt that analytical approaches are the best and numerical methods were inferior. I had a tough time and it took years to convince others about the need for numerical problem solving. 
Similarly ,I had difficulty in convincing other faculty about the growth of programming into software. Most rejected software as a discipline. They said programming is a tool and not scientific. IISc didn't get a computer till 1972 and didn't set up a full fledged computer science program till the mid eighties. That is due to the myopic views of concerned departmental faculty. 
But my troubles increased whenever I talked about Indian contributions to sciences like metallurgy. Faculty from aerospace asserted  that Pushpaka Vimana is fiction. All activities described in vedic literature were dismissed as fiction. Even vedic mathematics was described as a gimmick. 
Most of these growths and acceptance by people are due to two major thrusts.
Enormous, coordinated,multiexperts defined, and  indepth work which can be proved theoretically and experimentally . 
The evolution of a coherent view with modern notations as accepted by scientists with solid proofs. These conditions were not met by the ancient  Indian scientific work.  While numbers were accepted , there was reluctance to accept geometry. Astronomy was discredited as a part of astrology. Unfortunately,  logic - nyaya - was not understood and hence was not  accepted by our science community. It was left to Noam Chomsky to appreciate and understand Paninian grammar structures. I made two suggestions - one to include problems in Lilavati in our school mathematics textbooks at appropriate levels and to include the neti concept to define various terms. We don't teach grammar of Indian languages. That is the state even now . Even concrete implementable suggestions are ignored.

Greetings
Dks
22/08/25, 3:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 813

Vinod Vyasulu has two comments.
VINODVYASULU: https://www2.math.uconn.edu/~glaz/Preparation_For_Sciences/Lilavati%27s%20Swarm%20with%20Solution.pdf
: DKS, would Ramanujan's Notebook fall into the tradition of Vedic mathematics? He provided numerous theorems that have all kinds of applications in different fields. Others have proved some, many remain to be proved. A criticism of Vedic mathematics has been that it's doesn't provide proofs as today's mathematics requires. Nevertheless they are true. And isn't Ramanujan like that? Hardy did the mainstream stuff.

My response
The first reference deals with use of problems in Lilavati in an American university -
University of Connecticut. My request to our education minister in 1986 didn't see the light of the day. What a shame?
Your second comment has two parts. Let me look at the first one - what is Vedic mathematics?
Initially it meant sulabasutras which provided easy ways of arithmetic calculations. That and geometry were the requirements for building huge yagashalas.  So both number systems and arithmetic were part of vedas in addition to geometry , astronomy, geology etc. 
Later Aryabhatta, Varahamihira,  Bhaskara, Brahmagupta , Madhava and others developed more aspects of mathematics - solution of non linear equations, algebra, Dynamics, etc. They primarily used for calculating the positions and movements of many planetary bodies like sun, moon, planets and some stars very accurately - this is the base for Astronomy. They further used complex calculations for astrology. The application here was astrology. There are two main streams of Astrology - vakya based on both mathematics and grammar and ganitha- mathematics , this was modified to thrikganitha , corrected mathematics to adjust to lunar year calculations. We may say astrology is pseudo science. But it gave birth to several mathematical aspects - time and measurements of time precisely, planetary movements , tools for measurements, precise calculations of days, months , years and calenders, prediction of eclipses and many occurrences with planets . 
So mathematics in India was developed over a period of more than a thousand years. So it is appropriate to call them Indian mathematics though its foundations were laid at the Vedic period. 
Mathematicians in our universities in the past centuries have worked on understanding many activities done in the first millenia of the common era . 
Ramanujan is a prominent person in our  era. But he didn't provide proof for most discoveries. Most looked like conjectures based on intuition. We are not familiar with the approaches and methods. But he had provided detailed notebooks on his methods. Even steps have been provided , but how the steps came out is not clear . Hardy solved some but many more are remaining to uncode. That became a research area for many mathematicians.
So the term vedic mathematics is not a clearly defined one. If we restrict to what was in vedas , then it refers to arithmetic, solution of equations and planetary motion. Works by Aryabhatta, Varahamihira, Brahmagupta, Bhaskara etc are extensions of that mathematics. But Ramanujan's work goes beyond that. It didn't focus on astrology or astronomy , but it dealt with pure mathematics, mathematics for its beauty and not applicability. Ramanujan's mathematics used the western notations and it was very advanced. So it is different from vedic mathematics.  
While a large number of researchers are excited about Ramanujan's work, there is no such interest in the work of earlier mathematicians. Godel was one of the few who provided a holistic view. Unfortunately the holistic views of our mathematicians was not understood due to notational differences.
Logic in India has a longer history of development - close to 1600 years. Most logic focused on truth based on meanings . Logical operations were developed by many nyaya scholars  which go beyond the western logic notations. Many methods were developed by many scholars. Navya nyaya was a transition. Logic focused on reasoning in addition to operations. Unfortunately these were not decoded fully by our scientists ,even now. 
Your second comment: 
I agree with your comment that most work in the early years lacked proof. They were cryptic. So it wasn't easy to understand for even Indians. I don't see evidence of training in mathematics in gurukulas or treatises in mathematics. Calculations exist in Aryabhattiyam and Lilavati . Whereas logic literature is available in plenty. Mathematics was embedded in applications and not separately. I may be wrong here. Maybe we lost most of our works. 
Greetings
Dks
23/08/25, 4:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 814

Prof Karunakara adds more inputs to our discussions on Indian science understanding by Indians.  
“Dear Sir,
It is true reflection of Krishna's statement in Gita. We felt inferior about our knowledge and just followed what western says. Never come across such information in school education. Pity is Most of our knowledge is in Sanskrit and we read it to score more marks in exam. There was no support from Government either. I have heard that Chandrashekar Saraswati of Kanchi mutt was reciting some verses of Veda related to quantum mechanics. But how to move ahead .....
Thanks and regards,”

My response.
Thanks Prof karunakara for your deep interest . I agree that unfortunately all our scriptures are in sanskrit and that meant we are ignorant about what those scriptures contain. If you ask 100 people about rig veda , you will get 200 answers each different from others. 
While there are translations in English , mostly by foreigners, Rig veda is cryptic and these translations are equally ununderstandable. Indians have only discussed the religious parts and ignored the scientific side. 
Actually rig veda is a big source of information. It has many principles of living. It discusses the universe , earth , nature and natural forces. It discusses life and societal organizations and practices. It contains prayers to gods . It also looks at existence, evolution etc. Many scientific concepts were spread across the hymns . It discusses reality, eternal time, uncertainty, large forces, universal order , universal connectivity , cyclic nature of life , numerical calculations, etc. Since terms like quantum were invented in the 20th century , their concepts are found in rig veda - particularly Dynamics, uncertainty, discreteness, connectivity, quantum entanglement, discreteness , infinity, eternal etc . Nasadiya suktam in rig veda talks about existence, uncertainty , evolution, etc. It implies that nothing is certain. Surprises and changes are happening regularly in our life. 
We need to involve faculty in bringing out the many concepts in vedas and upanishads . But unfortunately that is not happening. A few people here and there study our ancient science , but the scientific depth is missing. 
I feel that logic as found in our nyaya will be a very useful contribution. 
Similarly our ancient scriptures particularly vedanta and upanishads have detailed analysis of a human - body, minds, controls, flows and connectivities. We talk of chakras and nadis - what are they? How do we create energy , use it efficiently? There are great descriptions on jnana , minds which can help us in designing better AI systems. Varaha upanishad discusses in detail human systems. We have information. We need to mine them, decode them, reinterpret them and put them for use in areas like education, health, AI etc. 
While many foreign universities have a centre to study Hinduism, we don't have any such centre in Indian universities.  Why are we shying away from serious academic work on our ancient knowledge systems? In today's AI world , both logic and grammar can play a big role to give us a good command over cognitive AI. We can leap forward.
Hope we wake up and consider these as serious areas for research .
I recall a statement by the Tamil satirist  and political guru, Cho Ramaswamy who said in a lighter vain, “ if you can't do something good  , then criticise it, make jokes on it and attack it.” That is exactly what we are doing with the Indian knowledge repository. 
Thanks for all .
Greetings
Dks
24/08/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 815
Having discussed comments from many friends and triggered by them , I now want to give my appraisal of vedic sciences .
First, I don't want to use the word science but systems . I try to distinguish ancient Indian systems from the western systems. I use the word system to include all aspects of development as science is restrictive in its use. 
It was Pythagoras who separated hard science from humanities  and languages. But vedic systems are holistic and integrated. Science was embedded in vedic systems. It looked at grammar, phonetics, logic, mathematics, construction etc in a unified and integrated manner. Vedas felt that  all aspects are strongly connected. Vedas took the complete path from conceptualization to application. Application was the outcome. 
The second difference refers to the methods of reasoning . 
How do we analyze or reason on a concept or statement ? 
There are three western methods :
Observations and experimentation 
Mathematical approaches
Logical approaches 
Indian systems use not one approach but a combination of observation , filtering, language, logic and mathematics plus intuition or self realization. Upanishads and vedanta give details. 
In addition, the Indian system uses enquiry - question and answers , discussions, multiple views etc to find truth about a statement. Brihadaranyaka upanishad is a great example of such analysis . Tarka is an accepted form of establishing a position. 
There is another difference. Western systems concentrate on matter. Indian systems understand connectivity, and waves. The western system still doesn't have a good picture of waves , energy, mind , body reactions, diffusion etc. Indian systems moved into the domain of unknowns easily while western system restricted itself to known domains, rarely straying into nearby unknowns. But pouring scorns on unknowns.
Let me look at some aspects of Indian systems :
True the vedas talk about metallurgy , construction , agriculture etc,. Let me divide systems  into hard and soft. Hard sciences are matter based, experimentation and observation oriented say upto molecular level and even atomic level propounded by physics and chemistry . These are well developed over the past 400 years. These are primarily hard process oriented. While vedas talk about heat transfer , metallurgy , astronomy - i consider astronomy as part hard part soft science- , the explanations , theory and processes are missing in vedas . Some aspects are found in darsanas like samkya and Visesika. By the mid  20th century , we embedded soft sciences into hard sciences, quantum theory is a good example. Vedas really talk about many concepts and principles of hard science, an example being detailed and extensive categorization and classification found in much literature with a lot of painstaking and detailed effort. 
Indian scientific and philosophical systems concentrated on mostly soft aspects and used hard experimentation as a support. So we built strong foundations in grammar, logic , Mathematics,  human systems, psychology, mind , thinking, education and learning . Our gurukula system allowed students to explore deeply into various concepts . So our learning was inquisitive and deep. There was a lot of clarity in understanding.This is inherent in our adaptations to new areas with speed and by large numbers. The best example is software - the domination established by us. Do you think that our training for thousands of years on soft systems has no role in these developments? We are well equipped to move fast into AI. During the late nineties and early twenties , I was asked a question by many - why Bangalore dominates the software scene in the world? My answer was synergy in thinking, learning, opportunities, infrastructure, critical mass of people, great enthusiasm, moving into unknown areas with ease.
Greetings
Dks
25/08/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 816

I thank the discussers for looking at topics of interest and importance . Let me return to my 1970 period in IISc.  
1970 was again another watershed year in my life. I submitted my thesis for PhD.  I learnt an important lesson . 
Success in life doesn't come from hard work, intelligence , productive work, sincerity , participation etc. I had all of them to a reasonable measure. I had the confidence of several important people in IISc like Prof Dhawan, Prof R Narasimha, Prof BS Ramakrishna , Prof Krishna Prasad of Mechanical engineering , Prof AK Rao, Prof AR Vasudevamurthy, Prof T Ramakrishnan, Prof Cama etc. I built a good support system with many in admin, and I became indispensable to Prof Narayana Iyengar,  head of the department.  My research has progressed well with Prof Devanathan's support. I submitted the thesis by april1970. I should consider myself to be safe and successful. But success needed a bigger and more important ingredient - psychology of humans as Wodehouse's Jeeves would say. Understanding people in positions, anticipating them and protecting oneself is the key to success. I saw a great powerplay and was affected by it for the next 20 years. I antagonised two people due to the power plays.  Let me talk about it later.
Another major development took place in 1970. Recall the visit by Prof Dhawan and group to the then USSR to discuss starting a joint school in collaboration with their institutions. IISc formalised the setting up of the school of automation in collaboration with Moscow Power Institute. Deekshatulu was identified as a coordinator. It was located in the EE department but with associate faculty - three members from the mechanical engineering department and a few from the  ECE department.  About half of the EE faculty were involved in the school. Most control faculty became members of the new school. I got attached to the school due to my work on computers. But I had a big role in the running of the EE department,  in the curriculum committee of the institute , the hostel and power committee. This was the first interdepartmental experiment at IISc.  The newly built extension  wing ,housing the controls group , was given to the newly established school. 
After Deekshatulu left for the USA in 1970 for sabbatical,  the school was managed by Prof Iyengar assisted by ISN Murty. Prof IG Sarma ,who joined the aerospace department from IIT Kanpur,  was associated with the school. Prof SV Rangaswamy also joined the school from ECE department.  But IGS created problems for the school. Prof Chidambara and Prof EV Krishnamurthy also joined in 1970 71 as well as Prof V Krishnan,and  Prof Joshi. Institute got a sizable number more than 20 at the senior levels of associate professors and professors . That meant that our stable ,business as usual , activities were disturbed. We became a top heavy institute. Till 1970, the institute was mostly a growing one with a majority of faculty at the lecturer level with most of them doing PhD. There was a lot of energy, a lot of enthusiasm ,and a lot of interest in the new areas. But with the new additions at higher levels, this enthusiastic situation  was affected. Further the new entrants tried to compare the functioning at IISc with the functioning in their old institution. They were suggesting changes which didn't go well with many seniors. It led to friction. Homogeneity was lost. But it was good. We started debates and discussions and accepted good suggestions. Also the new entrants liked our governance system and most of the new faculty became defenders of IISc quickly. Only a few carried a chip on their shoulder . We had many senior professors coming from IIT Kanpur and they wanted to impose IIT Kanpur rules here. Fortunately , it didn't work. They also realised the value of the institutes processes ,policies and practices were the best . They realised that many came here from IIT Kanpur asked they were not happy with the ambience there. They like our ambience and our stability. 
So new ideas started coming in and conflicts started building up both in the institute and the department.  
More in the next 
Greetings 
Dks
26/08/25, 5:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 817
I saw from a front seat a power play at that young inexperienced - to power struggles- age and was affected by it for the next 25 years. Understanding the power play and finding ways to compensate for its effects helped me in my life. 
Prof Deekshatulu left for the US and the activities of the school , still in its formative stages ,were struggling. 
IGS wanted to take control of the school and was working towards that. He started with an act of establishing himself as the leader of control systems group in the EE department in the absence of Deekshatulu.  Let me give one instance. 
One of the major activities before the start of a new semester is to decide on the courses to be offered in the coming semester and the faculty to teach it. Normally this needs a certain amount of time due to the resolution of conflicts arising from faculty's interests ,time and research needs. I was assigned this tough task . So I went around and got the consent from most faculty and prepared a list of courses and faculty agreed to teach them. I was to present it in the faculty meeting. That is when I got the shock of my life. Before I made my presentation, IGS said that he has finalized the list of faculty who will teach the control courses. This shocked many senior faculty .  He made his presentation. Then Prof Iyengar told me to give my list. Since there were no differences , it was adopted in the meeting. Many seniors expressed shock after the meeting. 
IGS told Dhawan that progress in the development of the school was not satisfactory. So Prof Dhawan appointed IGS as the chair of the school and identified a committee to run the school. The school got delinked from the EE department from that day. The relationships got strained. 
IGS stopped attending the EE activities and concentrated his attention on the activities of the school. 
It was decided to send our faculty to Moscow. The first batch left in 1971 . I was identified for the second batch along with VVS, NV, and Hariharan.  We got a teacher from the USSR to train us in Russian language . It was intense learning every day with her. This continued for nearly a year. 
By then, the first batch returned and YV Venkatesh said that the training was useless. R krishnan explained his sufferings in Moscow to get vegetarian food. IGS was finding excuses to inform the director why the school is not moving forward and why progress is slow. IGS, working on his plans to ditch the collaboration , decided to cancel our proposed visit to the USSR. So the Russian training was a waste. The only thing that happened in 1971-72 was the starting of the PhD program in the school. 
During the 1970-71 period , Prof Lewis joined the Foreign languages department to teach English. I attended his classes also for two years. That was useful. 
I was busy with my other activities as assistant warden of the hostel, chair of the power committee, and a member of the curriculum committee in addition to teaching several new courses. It was an intense learning period. 
More in the next post
Greetings 
Dks
27/08/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Today is ganesha Chaturthi. It was introduced as a public worship and immersion of Ganesha idols by Bal Gangadhar Tilak celebrated in many parts of India- not in Kolkata, punjab and Delhi. 
Let us invoke the rig vedic mantra here for prosperity and removal of obstacles. Most of you might have heard this recited. 
ग॒णानां॑ त्वा ग॒णप॑तिं हवामहे क॒विं क॑वी॒नामु॑प॒मश्र॑वस्तमम् । ज्ये॒ष्ठ॒राजं॒ ब्रह्म॑णां ब्रह्मणस्पत॒ आ न॑: शृ॒ण्वन्नू॒तिभि॑: सीद॒ साद॑नम् ॥
गणानां त्वा गणपतिं हवामहे कविं कवीनामुपमश्रवस्तमम् । ज्येष्ठराजं ब्रह्मणां ब्रह्मणस्पत आ नः शृण्वन्नूतिभिः सीद सादनम् ॥
gaṇānāṃ tvā gaṇapatiṃ havāmahe kaviṃ kavīnām upamaśravastamam | jyeṣṭharājam brahmaṇām brahmaṇas pata ā naḥ śṛṇvann ūtibhiḥ sīda sādanam ||
“We invoke the Brahmaṇaspati, chief leader of the (heavenly) bands; a sage of sage; abounding beyond measure in (every kind of) food;best lord of prayer; hearing our invocations, come with your protections, and sit down in the chamber of yaga .”
Greetings to all. 
Dks
27/08/25, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 818
Before Prof Devanathan was hospitalized , he told me that he recommended me to teach Fortran to students in a new training institution called Datamatics corporation founded  by a person Dr LS Kanodia , an early bird in computer training and the only one. 
So in mid june 1970 , when Mr Chandrasekhara met me, I wasn't surprised . He said he is the manager of Datamatics and wanted me to teach Fortran . The lectures were in the evening between 600pm to 730pm . Their office and class room were located in Kempe gowda road in the bank of India building . So I had to commute by bus to that place every day. These kept me busy as I had completed my PhD by then. I liked Chandrasekhara from the beginning , a nice , mild , friendly and well spoken person. We became close. He was my third friend after Mr Bukebag and Thimme Gowda , all three interested in my welfare and helped me throughout. 
My association with Chandrasekhara continued for about eight years till 1978. He died suddenly in 1988 due to a heart attack and I lost a great friend. The association with Datamatics allowed me to dig deep into programming languages. I taught Fortran to several hundred students and Autocoder to hundreds as well as COBOL to many . I did courses in many industries and R and D organizations. In addition ,I helped a large number of people in writing programs. 
Let me move to another activity of mine - timetable committee. Prof Krishnaprasad took charge as convenor of the time table committee and I assisted him. We restructured the time table and I simplified the process . I built a computer algorithm. Prof RNarasimha was impressed. So I was made the convenor of the time table committee in 1971. Prof Dhawan introduced me to the senate and faculties as I wasn't a member being a lecturer then. It was a great recognition for me being entrusted with the major task of preparing a time table for all courses run in the institute.  The lecture halls complex was ready and I allotted the rooms for lectures. As all members of the committee were either professors or assistant professors,  I had some run-ins with some faculty . But fortunately most cooperated and I could handle the activities successfully. Prof Dhawan introduced me to  Prof Kothari, the UGC chairman and I discussed my work of computerization with him. It was the first successful job I did as a leader.
 It was also a good experience in human relations. Midway in my term as convenor , Prof Dhawan left for Caltech on sabbatical.  I had problems even with the in charge director who diverted furniture from three classrooms to his department. When I said I had a shortage  in allotting rooms for courses, he told me that I could use the organic chemistry class room also. But the chairman of OC protested . I talked to the registrar to resolve it , but he laughed it off by saying that he loved fights between academics. So I had to do with the classrooms in the central lecture halls only. I managed the allocation. 
Greetings 
Dks
28/08/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 819
I realised another characteristic existing in me - urge to explore. I talked about my urge to improve before. The year 1970 revealed my capability to explore . I explored not only scientific aspects but also on human behaviours and teaching.
  My teaching expanded from the motivated IISc students to interested groups of people of varying interests, ages and education that I encountered at Datamatics while teaching programming . I was teaching people older than me.  I had very senior researchers in my class as well as inexperienced youngsters, some with interest in learning , some without . But most did my daily assignments. I believed that programming is not just classroom lectures but mostly based on regular  practices.  So I gave exercises everyday and saw that everyone complied with it.  That experience made me understand ways of handling people who were not motivated or intelligent. This was revealed in a stronger sense and full force when I taught computer courses in many engineering colleges, in Proficience, and in public lectures at Rotary clubs. 
My urge to explore  diversified from research to teaching several new courses. I taught numerical analysis to the engineers in Kirloskar electric company . Prof G Krishna returned . So we floated a course on optimization for the first time in the institute. I also taught a new course on computational methods to our BE students. 
I changed my computer systems course . Instead of logic and arithmetic, I moved into details explained in an excellent book by Burroughs corporation which detailed most devices like card reader, buffers, etc. I reduced the time on hardware and spent about 5 hours on compilers and 5 hours on operating systems. I started on OS teaching and understanding in 1970 and this continued for the next 25 years. I started teaching OS later as a full course at IISc,  IIT Bombay and several colleges. This was my starting point. I used an IBM manual to teach OS concepts. 
I realised one important distinction. Learning does not come from outside - reading books, listening to lectures. It comes from inside. The outside provides data . Only your inside converts it into meaningful knowledge.  Unfortunately we don't appreciate this important fact-
Cognition is the process of taking facts, linking them, analysing them,  creating many views, applying them, looking for impacts and looking for future developments. This has to be done by our mind, not by our teachers, mentors or books . 
We don't build these capabilities of self learning in our students. That is why I considered term paper- writing on a topic based on latest research - is a good learning tool according to me. I also used another tool - writing large programs of thousands of line - at a time when computing power was meagre. I did my programming in low level languages and solved large problems by writing 1000s of lines of code. That gave me the confidence that my students can do it. 
Initially,  I asked the students to submit a topic for the term paper and a problem statement for problem solving. Later, based on my experiences,  I divided the total activity into three or four stages and created timelines so the students can be checked for being on track. This reduced default time and kept the students on track. That was very useful. 
I assigned about 50% to 60%  weightage for these two in the sessional marks, and that helped most students to go past the pass grade. Failures were almost nonexistent in my classes. Let me continue this further in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
29/08/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 820
Let me look at teaching activities. I worked on ,thinking about teaching all the time. 
Teaching is no stranger to me. 
What I was trying to state was the fact that I did a deep thinking and evolved a concept on teaching based on my experiences - 1.observing teachers and speakers - more than 100 teachers for 18 years. 
2.Observing and understanding the  many paths for learning - from the family, neighbours,  friends, society, news media, fiction books, movies, conversations , discussions etc.
3.Remembering the facts through contemplation,
4.Analysing the collected data to produce knowledge, questioning the facts, filtering the facts 
5.Experimenting with the facts ,testing their validity 
6.studying the facts from various angles to get a holistic knowledge 
7. Producing new facts
8. Family tradition of teaching. 
What was my realization on teaching going on in our colleges? This depicts the current trends in teaching in general.
It is a pure backward looking activity dependent on text books with no motivation for curiosity and innovation. 
It deals with existing knowledge without kindling students to look at new changes happening. .It is not modern or relevant. I never understood applied mechanics . If beams and bridges were brought into the picture , I would have understood cantilever better. Arch was ignored. Concepts should be linked to applications. That was missing. 
It is one directional - teacher to student. Cognition is incidental and reserved for the best teachers.  
It is not connected , and looks artificial. Engineering is today a strongly connected environment. So whole is more important than parts . Our curriculum is parts based . Integration is not attempted. Top down approach is missing. 
These led me to believe that a person has to use his mind extensively to learn and that defined my role as a teacher - not just a knowledge transferring person but a facilitator , a mentor, an inspirer , a provider of paths for learning as a guru or Acharya was doing in the past. This led me to assume some aspects.
My axioms are 
1.Teachers and students are co-travellers in search of new knowledge,  not just looking at the existing knowledge.  This was necessary for me to get into a rapidly changing field of computer science. 
2. Cognition is an activity to be executed by a student. So teachers should energize them and push them to self learn.
3.A teacher should be a learner first , should know more than his students. 
4. A teacher should know an overall aspect of his area . He should not focus on the topics of his course only . He should connect it with other topics in relevant topics and applications. He should get a feel of the overall environment of his area including futuristic changes , impacts on society. This understanding came to me faster because I was getting into a new area of computer science with a large untapped potential for developments and applications and ample opportunities for thinking . 
5.A teacher should explain and  clarify difficult topics , not ignore them, in order  to aid in the cognition of students. Understanding of concepts is an important purpose of teaching and learning.  
6. A teacher should have a futuristic outlook , not look backwards , a disease I find in our teaching community. Research is not a vehicle for promotion, but a quest for futuristic thinking.
More in the next.
Greetings 
Dks
30/08/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 821

Let me list some principles adopted by me in teaching.
Don't assume students are bad. Don't fail them as far  as possible. Do your evaluations seriously. Review them carefully . Provide opportunities for students to get through the exam. 
Understand your students' knowledge levels and capabilities. Help them to acquire the prerequisite knowledge. My students at IISc were attentive but didn't ask questions. My students at IIM asked me a lot of questions. They were thinking on their feet. My students at many  colleges were a mixed lot, many very keen and many disinterested totally. My industry participants were looking from the point of view of using what they learn . 
Prepare the complete course plan . The plan should have a focus - what do you want your students to be capable of at the end . Say , in an OS course, do you want students to design an OS at the end or use an OS? I always built my course with designers in mind. The plan should have a clarity - what contents are needed? What contents connect well to form a whole? How do we connect to the broader discipline? What is the future directions in the area? Then identify sources .Go through the books before the semester starts as far as possible but add more if you come across new aspects. That was necessary for computer courses as concepts were evolving.  Read more books, papers and manuals. Be thorough.  Plan for the next lecture in detail. The complete plans are necessary for the success of a course. Success is measured by the satisfaction of students.
Try to enhance their learning and cognition through self work and self thinking. Individual term paper and problem solving skills are important. 
Build innovation into the course
Make the contents modern . Change it every year. Give a futuristic perspective. 
Identify difficult concepts. Explain in detail. This is necessary . For example text books don't explain the differences between a program, a process and a thread. So it is a teacher's job to distinguish between these. Teaching second law of thermodynamics is tough 
Don't follow the text in the book verbatim. Add additional contents. I always do that and try to include it in evaluation. Go for in depth explanation. Provide social ,economic and technological impacts. Give practical examples. 
Spend time on detailed explanations of definitions. Don't use jargon, clichés to define a term or concept. Make definitions holistic . That is a big art. Brihadaranya upanishad gives a detailed way of defining what are not Brahman using the neti rule. 
Provide practical examples, anecdotes to improve attention. We should present a whole situation  first, and then discuss  the problems found in it  and later discuss the detailed solution methods. Don't jump into models and mathematics first. That is unfortunately the trend now. Disconnected parts won't easily lead one to visualise the whole. 
Ask questions and try to extract answers. It is another approach to improve cognition. I normally ask two or three questions in every lecture . This helps me in many ways. One , I understand the level of understanding by the students. Two it makes them think deeper . Three it creates some excitement . 
Allow questioning by students. 
Provide an abstract of each lecture in the end and recap it in the beginning of the next lecture. 
Speak clearly. Don't mumble. Use simple short sentences. Write on the board or ppt clearly , visible to all. Give time to assimilate. 
Certain aspects followed by professions and in practices are not understood easily or ignored by most. Talk about processes, performance requirements, metrics, resilience, benchmarks, stress tests, project evaluation, vendor evaluation,  technology evaluation etc.
Greetings 
Dks
31/08/25, 5:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 822
Let us look at some comments. 
Mr Sambamurthy:
“The cocktail of success you mentioned applied to all organisations not just IISC.
 Many organisations don't embrace these principles and fail. In my experience with 8 organisations Agility, Openness, Future Outlook standout. 
Thanks for sharing.

I still urge you to write a book. There are  open online platforms . Publishing is far more easier. Present and future generations benefit.”

Dr Babu 
“Dr DKS
Thanks for sharing your experiences at IISC with your students and teaching techniques.
I am happy that the environment provided you those opportunities and you utilised . Some times your created the environment.
Can I say that you might have been among the top layers of such staff even at IISc? (10 to 20%) 
I pray Almighty to bless you  for long and healthy life.
Our old sastras were passed on to the generations by word of mouth.
I request to consolidate your experiences at IISC and elsewhere in small booklets in pdf  form so that the next generation can get inspiration and benefit from your experiences.
Regards
 Mahendra Babu”
Dr Sonam Kumar
“Thank you Professor, so much. This message serves as a handbook to me for being a better teacher.”

My response 
Thanks . Glad about your interests in me .
I keep thinking about making a book. Don't know that I have energy to do it . Let me see. Do we have any suggestions on an editor cum  publisher?
Prof Karunakara 
“Dear sir,
Happy to know so much good experimentation has been done on  course delivery which encouraged students to learn better. Why such good practices not flown down to universities? Most of  them have system that encourages rote learning. With present day question Bank approach killed new thinking both at faculty and students levels. Eventhough many institutes got autonomous,  they are afraid of changing the learning methodologies (except few). 
How to make our students to move away from rote learning and become solution providers? 
Why interdisciplinary learning not gained much momentum at university levels? 
How to make our system better to make our students to have better transition from college to corporate life?
Thanks and regards”
My response
Thanks for your concern. It is an important set of concerns and questions. I am glad that there are some like you concerned about the prevailing situation. It is not an easy task to change our systems. But it has happened in our economy, our product quality ,our poverty alleviation programs, our banking practices for the poor etc. So we shouldn't lose hope. But we need to rise against mediocrity , get the “aiyo papa" mindset out of our thinking, be objective , be visionary , be participative , be inclusive,  be kind and share resources , and be harmonious- all Rig vedic statements. 
The first answer to your concerns is 
A complete lack of higher level of aspirations and achievements. This afflicts not just our education but other structures also - like industries, local governance, health, transport, urban garbage etc. We want to live in our cocoons within our comfort zone.  Awareness of this problem is not enough. But Awareness is the first step - to know why we are like this? 
That is a serious problem that I see . 
It leads to a  number of diseases:
Mechanical lifestyle - no thinking, survival mindset, firefighting methods 
Low energy levels 
Low motivation
Purposeless living 
Archaic mindset
Rigid rules 
Inward living ,not outward
Be satisfied with basic things 
Poor ambience. Freedom from fear - is it real or mental or both?
Lack of trust.
No involvement - low levels of responsibility and ownership.
No vision 
Wrong direction - commercialize education. Poor governance mechanisms. No participatory systems. 
Divisive community 

Greetings 
Dks
01/09/25, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 823

Let me return to 1970 and IISc.  I attended several conferences - one at IIT Delhi,  another at Jaipur - a CBIP annual conference, a third at Delhi - a CBIP workshop and research session on load forecasting - and a fourth one at Bombay - these I remember now. It was the second time I visited IIT Delhi and the first time I met the power systems faculty. I had met the control systems faculty in 1969 at our control theory conference at Bangalore. I met a large number of researchers in the IIT conference but not any faculty from any other institutions. Most researchers were working on power systems Dynamics or protection but I was the only one present there working on computer applications to load flow and optimization. There was no computer science activity in IIT Delhi then. It was close to five years I was working on computer algorithms and I had several ME students who did project work in these areas. But no trace of any in other places except Kanpur- Dr Ramamurthy . 
What I realised then was that there wasn't much interest in power systems amidst researchers in the country. So I will be a lonely person in this area. 
So my decision to move to computer systems in 1968- 69 looked a good one. These facts validated my decision even though there weren't many faculty working in the computer area in India then. IIT Bombay had a computer group and I met Prof Isaac in 1970. But there was no research going on there. IIT Kanpur had a good group . The big place for computer science awareness and research was TIFR. I made  three trips every year to TIFR and used their computers and library and this continued till 1973 . 
The CBIP conference at Jaipur was a fruitful one. My work was appreciated. I was in the midst of many practising power engineers from state electricity boards and some from private companies like Tata electric,  Calcutta electric and Bombay suburban. I also became a reporter for a session. I became an important person in CBIP. Since Prof HNR left in 1969, none from the EE department attended the research conference except me. Prof Gopalakrishna attended the conferences regularly. The conference was good. Since I was the only one attending the conference, I attended two working group meetings - one on the future voltage of transmission - 400kv or 500kv. While most in the committee favoured 500kv , BHEL ,the manufacturer of HV equipments like transformers and switchgear was for 400kv, the only reason being their agreements with a foreign company for the manufacture of 400kv equipments. Again I saw politics at work here. I also attended the research committee on power which is the apex body recommending grants to all participating institutions. 
We stayed in the engineering college hostel . I didn't relish the food . It wasn't spicy and had no rice. It was a rich food. Somehow I managed the food. 
Since I was the convenor of the time table committee , I had meetings and so I had very little time available for the jaipur conference. So I got approval from the director to fly from Bombay to Jaipur and back and for a train journey between Bangalore and Bombay.  The Jaipur flight came from Delhi and on my return trip, the scheduled flight couldn't land at Jaipur and it went straight to Bombay.  Fortunately there was another shuttle flight. I took that. But I have to rebook from indore and Ahmedabad to reach Bombay.  I reached by 4pm. I bought a lot of handicrafts and gave them to Venkatachalam , my cousin's husband and took the train to bangalore via Pune. It was a great journey and a good learning experience. 
Greetings 
Dks
02/09/25, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 824
The CBIP research conference on load forecasting was another revelation for me. I took a lot of effort , went through different trend analysis and regression methods, tried different types of curves and prepared a list of errors. It was a comprehensive work and got the merit award of CBIP. But I was unhappy at the response by the then  director of power survey , the main organization of the Central electricity authority for load growth predictions in the country , who dismissed all mathematical approaches. I was wondering when will these people wake up to the importance of analysis, statistical tools and comparisons. I had a similar  experience at Bangalore also. I was looking at load growth for Bangalore city, and talked to Mr Narayana Rao,KEB,  who became a good friend, said that they assign growth rates to each area and calculate the load growth,- a highly ad hoc procedure. It failed miserably. They assumed that chickpet areas wouldn't grow due to the congested buildings and didn't anticipate vertical growth ,but electricity consumption grew faster in that area.  We lived in this adhocism for long ignorant of available techniques used by the west. 
Actually this work on load prediction got me involved for the next two decades on debates. 
The biggest effect of such fallacious load growth predictions was the power cuts seen in many states in the country for the next 20 plus years. Even in the late eighties , there was a big argument between Prof AKN and the board authorities and Mr SG Ramachandra, an eminent and highly respected electrical engineer , who was actively involved in several public activities. While the board and SGR projected a high load growth with 10% growth rate - not supported by data or analysis, AKN argued that we should move away from the supply side and seriously look at the demand side - go for conservation. He also skipped analysis . So I was roped in by the greater Mysore chamber of industry to come up with a working paper. I got data for the previous 20 years and used several models to study the growth predictions. I came up with my numbers. I should say that my predictions were correct . They matched with  the actual load - maximum demand for karnataka- values measured for the next ten years. 
Then SGR spilled the beans of practicality. If you increase demand, the government might come up with finances to meet half the demand . There will be construction delays . Hence the need to project a higher demand. 
The regular power cuts produced an alternate , more costly and more polluting solution. Installation of in house  diesel generators by thousands of establishments and all industries in Bengaluru became a necessity. Our DG capacity exceeded our maximum demand. 
I had to put up a 4MW DG power station at IISc to meet our needs for continuous power. I also recommended DG power for JNCASR and Jayadeva also. 
When we started the mahithisindhu program of 1000 high schools computerization in Karnataka in the late nineties,  we didn't plan for a DG set. But power disruptions of six to eight hours in rural areas were common and we had to install DG sets in all these schools. 
That is the tragedy of poor planning of electricity demands in India. 
A neglect of proper tool resulted in devious and costly solutions reminding us of the saying - pennywise pound foolish - that were our electricity boards where adhocism and total inward thinking were ruling .
Greetings
Dks
03/09/25, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 825

I found that there are many advantages to attending conferences. 
One major advantage of attending conferences is an increase in my network. You come to know many people - students and faculty as well as industry and government senior engineers.  By 1970 , just three years into my  job, I knew several senior chairman and chief engineers of state electricity boards , several faculty at IITs,  several senior directors of CEA and several senior power engineers in Tatas and other companies. That was very helpful. 
One person whose association was very useful to me was Mr SS Murthy, director of CEA, and later became a member of CEA . I continued my association with him for more than 25 years. He got us several projects like the Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Delhi electric supply undertaking etc. He was one person in CEA who had ideas of a systemic approach to power grids and operations in India.  He proposed a separate power systems section in CEA and became its first head.
While the west was setting up integrated control centres for power grids so as to provide a trouble free operation , we were not even thinking about it. 
The second advantage is your technical interactions, your delivery of the talk and your capacity to make the audience interested in your topic and understand some concepts that you are expounding. This increased my clarity first and also my confidence level. I wasn't afraid of talking to hundreds of unknown people and even non academics. 
I recall the statement of a chief engineer of Kerala state electricity board. He said that he dreaded the  mathematics in my talk and thought he would sleep of. He said that he understood the way I spoke and complimented me for my talk. This led me to my next activity. 
The other advantage is that you know the pulse of people. You may learn from them human behaviours, may not be technical. You know some of the moods of India.
You also know the kind of work, if any, going on in India. That is why I said no CS work is going, power systems work picked up post 1980 only, the major activity was in control theory at some IIT s and IISc as well as the Institute of radio physics, Calcutta.  Most research was going on in a few central institutions. Lots of work was going on on devices, transmission line sagging,  switching systems, insulation testing  and protection in power systems. Lot of work was going on in water resources and hydraulics. CBIP conferences were much better and practical  than the institution of engineers conferences - I had attended several CBIP and IE conferences. 
Greetings 
Dks
04/09/25, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 826

Let me look at another problem. Since I completed my PhD , I was  looking at some new problems pertaining to an overall picture of power systems operations and control. It is a complex subject , nobody in India even understood this subject. 
There are broadly two major controls in a power grid - load frequency control to handle load variations and generation control which maintains supply voltages within permissible limits . 
The control at that time was  done with an analog controller at power stations and manual adjustments . But it wasn't good. While digital computers can fully automate these controls with fast responses, we didn't even think of that direction . Control activity in India is poor both for frequency and voltage. 
In order to get ready for digital control ,there was a discussion in 1969  about the policy to be adapted - total automatic control or control with human guidance. Americans moved to total automatic control ,but the British used the existing control equipments,  added a computer to calculate control decisions and had strategies to help operators with  these decisions . It superimposed a computer to an existing and integrated  control system for LFC.  The operator can modify  and then implement the modified  decisions. So I decided to work on an integrated total control strategy for India.  I realised that the British strategy was temporary and would die in a decade. But India is getting into this new area . So we should be prepared for this big transition. While Tatas installed a digital control system in Trombay , the state electricity boards waited till the nineties to implement the digital computer based load dispatch systems. 
That was the time interstate power flows were increasing and centralised super power plants were being set up. So each state cannot look at its control in isolation. It won't work. This is due to the basic rule that you can interconnect two systems only when their frequencies are the same. Load frequency control should be common. So the government was thinking of setting up regional electricity boards to take care of interstate exchanges of energy and power. So I included this structure and built a reliable network between the load dispatch computers of the participating states. That was at a time when there were no load dispatch centres and networking was unknown.  Wide area network concept will come up later after more than 20 years- mostly in the  late nineties. 
I prepared an exhaustive paper on digital integrated control of interconnected power systems and presented it in the CBIP research session in 1971. It was appreciated by most participants. It was awarded a gold medal. 
Based on my paper, CBIP decided to set up a new working group on power system control and I, a junior faculty, was made its convenor . I considered it a great honour and the job as a necessary one for India.  
Unfortunately, the committee members had no idea of this topic. It was ahead of their time. 
Later in the eighties ,the central government decided to go in for computer based load dispatch centres in all regional boards, and gave orders to Siemens and Brown Baveri. They selected engineers from CEA and CMC for training abroad. It was decided to train them on both power systems and computers .I got involved with PSTI to train these engineers on computer fundamentals, power system operations and  load dispatch operations. I bore the brunt of lectures. There were three separate programs of 15days each for a larger group of engineers. It was a good experience. I visited Brown Baveri and looked at their systems . 
Greetings 
Dks
05/09/25, 4:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 827

Let me now change the topic. My long exposure to load growth predictions and control revealed an interesting fact about our institutions . Most people - engineers ,administrators , managers, policy planners etc lack vision, imagination and more importantly curiosity. We live in our cocoons - a comfortable reality created by each one of us and we live in that world of our beliefs ,our activities - almost like a frog in a well scenario. While youngsters break the mould initially ,sooner or later they also fall into the cocoon state. They lose energy and initiative. I say that many either do firefighting or retire mentally. This situation - mediocrity-is pretty serious and needs to be addressed. 
We saw the concerns of Professors Parvati and Karunakara. I have heard this question “ why do we have many mediocre institutions? Why do we have no research breakthroughs?
The diagnosis by most  is poor. Most claim poor funding as the answer. I feel that increased funding will help ,but won't solve the problem. CV Raman got no funds , but he got the nobel prize by doing science everywhere including in the AG's office. I claim lack of motivation, interest in challenges , excitement , team work, synergy, futuristic vision  and deep work as more important reasons. 
When I was talking about this with my friend Gurumurthy, he asked me - what about startups? No doubt I see thousands of youngsters today bubbling with energy and are eager to work , directions and visions are missing. A low hanging fruit was identified and most startups don't succeed . So it was a short term enthusiasm leading to frustrations. If we have to make a sustainable success of the established startup culture , we need to work in a top down ,connected manner not as independent single application focused entities. 
Most youngsters have a lot of enthusiasm and energy but get frustrated very fast. Ambience - poor and toxic- is the main reason. The excitement disappears fast with years. I know a young engineer . He joined a defence research lab and did some good work. Lack of appreciation and credit, bureaucratic ambience, defence dominance pushed him to leave the job . He lost interest in research . This is not one case. 
The government introduced the QIP program  for motivating engineering college faculty to get involved in research and do a PhD. The results - many got benefited with PhD. But after returning to their parents institution, most went back to their old ways and led a routine teaching life with no research. 
Most of us are happy with a routine government job or a big company job and get settled into a routine life. But is that the purpose of living , is there a higher level of satisfaction that one should get , does one use his potential to live and improve living in general? , doubtful? We may anticipate  a turbulent lifestyle in the coming years with AI becoming more conscious than us humans , more alert, more informative and even knowledgeable.  
We will continue these discussions in the next post. 
Greetings 
Dks
06/09/25, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 828
In order to understand the situation, let me go back to the basics.
We need to understand that institutions are mediocre because people became mediocre. People play a big role in our institutions and organizations. We don't appreciate this factor. People should accept the brickbats for running mediocre organizations.
People at the helm created a toxic environment which further completely destroyed motivation and creativity. Let me look at people first. 
This further led me to again ask the question - Who is a human? - a worker, a farmer, a merchant a clerk , an engineer ,a teacher, a house wife  - this defined a normal person 
dealing with ordinary survival activities.  
That was the first stage of defining a human based on activities. 
Let us move to the second stage - a person goes through a standard ,predefined education and he or she is worried about a job for survival. 
This also deals with a normal person - may be an 18th century common person. 
Let us look at the third stage - a thinking person - someone who wants to improve his or her knowledge , his or her activities, his or her social interactions. This involves reading ,listening, basic levels of understanding , following rules, some common sense, some societal work etc. This is a real discrimination of a human from animals. One expresses one's opinions, concerns , interests and builds answers through choices. So decision making is important at this stage. But still the aspirational levels are low, the expectations are low. The human is becoming a normal, standard materialistic person. They don't use most of their mind or consciousness- more like a 19th century person. 
Most humans fit into the above four levels. 
All people in these four levels build their cocoons , a virtual cocoon of beliefs, mindsets, limited knowledge and understandings pertaining to their domain and live in them like a frog in the well. They don't look outside. They aren't future proofed. Worms are not the only things that build cocoons. We should understand that we also build a lifelong mental cocoon - it is not beneficial. It prevents us from knowing our potentials and realizing them to have a meaningful life. Up to this level, humans are a burden to the world and it is a negative living. We need to break free from this cocoon state. Even worms break their cocoon. Why not humans? 
Because of these states of living, our organizations, our government and our educational institutions suffer with mediocrity. We justify our existence  with excuses , we exult in externalities not on core aspects .


But progress , development , transformations come from the next level. I will call this transformation and innovation level . The people of this group are deep learners, know their self- capabilities, weaknesses,  strengths etc- , highly cognitive, deep thinkers, contemplators, futuristic and with a mission  - people with a purpose in life , wanting to achieve something, helping others and society, looking for sustainable living . Fortunately there are quite a good number of people at this level. We see many scientists, eminent engineers, industry and political leaders who fall in this category. But they lack holistic vision. They get trapped by firefighting and rat races. 
The sixth level is a very special level . I want to call this spiritual level. A person has many purposes in life, he or she goes beyond the materialistic domain , has a very broad and deep knowledge, has a foresight ,and  futuristic vision  and builds  critical questioning, analysing , thinking capabilities, increases  consciousness and understands  the reality , the problems and looks for better solutions. This is an achievement and leadership level. The number in this level is very small. A country with a better number of people in this category and their impacts will have greater strengths and successes. 
People move upwards from level 1 to a desired level. 
As a country, I see that most people in India fit into  the first four stages with a reasonable number in level 5. For a country to progress in all directions and in a sustainable and happy manner,  we need more people on level 6. We don't have enough at this high level. 
How do we do it?in the next post
Greetings
Dks
07/09/25, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 829
It- the question of taking people to the sixth level-  is a tough question. How do we get a few lakhs to a few millions of people to move to the spiritual high conscious level? 
Human evolution meant humans climbing a ladder of consciousness and going up . Even sixth level may have many sublevels and we can think of a seventh level or eighth level. Today , AI will reach the fifth level of consciousness. So it will beat us if we stay there. So there is an urgency to move up if you want to survive. 
First let us see the first  cause of mediocrity:  fear ,slavery, submissiveness , - toxic work culture .
Second cause - satisfaction - Macaulayen  education killed aspirations , quest and meeting challenges .
Third cause - lack of freedom , goals, vision ,long term approaches. 
While scientific approach ignores these three components of mediocrity , Hindu upanishads and darsanas emphasize them. By throwing the sanatana dharma out , we went back to mediocrity.
It means
We don't believe in ourselves.
We look for excuses and peripheral reasons . Most think money is the main reason for reaching top levels. Many think reading books will take us up. Many say attending courses will be enough. Sorry those won't work. 
We are not free
We are ignorant of our capacity 
We are afraid to come out of our cocoons. We won't break our cocoons. We hang on to our beliefs strongly. 

So the change involves awareness, understanding, maturity ,wisdom and  mindset changes , not an easy task. 

If you ask a secondary question -
Who or what  is  responsible for our not moving to the sixth stage of humanism ? 
The factors are
Lack of awareness.
Fixed mindset.
Satisfaction 
Poor ,non holistic, specialisation based education system ignoring the qualities required to go to the sixth level. 
Developmental mechanisms to help us to reach the sixth level are not clear or straight forward. We stopped contemplating and self learning. 
Our early gurukula system aimed at a holistic person. It helped in building leaders. Our vedas and bhagavad Gita emphasized on harmonious,  orderly , sharing living . They emphasized on mind development. 
Let me look at this in a different way.
What should be the food for a person?
Our nutritionists and we also look at food from our body and energy perspective. But as Tiruvalluvar said 
When there is no food for the mind , we get food for the body.
So food is essential for mind development. We need to take it everyday. 
What are the ingredients of mental food?
Pranayama, meditation, yoga, contemplation, prayer, observations, cognitive processes, thinking, analysing, reading, writing , helping the society, inventing,  deep work etc. 
This means we need a total revamp of our education . While it has components for physical and materialistic developments, we need equal or greater  weightage for mental development. It is a new paradigm ,new way of thinking , a new way of working , a highly open questioning mindset - don't accept anything, question, and find new truths, new realities. 
It does not happen by reading a book or attending a course.
It does not happen by talking about it .
It does not happen by talking about it. 
It is not part of any existing curriculum like human psychology. 
Then how do we go about getting higher consciousness?
Let us see in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
08/09/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 830
Going to the sixth level is a highly complex problem. You need to break many things and build a whole new reality - and new knowledge system, a new mindset. So I consider it an aspirational level - a level every human being should aim to get into in one’s lifetime . As our vedas say , it needs a fire inside every human - a fire to know what is not known, an eternal quest to unfold the reality and move away from maya ,the illusion. 
Let me pose the problem as a set of assertions. 
Assertion 1. Accept that we live in a world of maya - illusions. Many beliefs may be wrong. We need to break them.
Assertion 2. We use a one dimensional approach to problem solving . That is taught to us by science. But we decide in our life by looking at many factors.That doesn't fit into reality . It is Maya again. 
Assertion 3. We are happy to learn a small bit of  what is known - known facts about us and the world. Even there ,our cognition is poor. We accept a lot.  We live in a comfort zone - a nice cocoon . Break It. Look for unknowns . Then you move to the future, reducing surprises.
Assertion 4. We assume the world and activities are deterministic.  They are not. They are random. Change your approaches. 
Assertion 5. It is a life long regular practice. 
Assertion 6 . It involves involvement, dedication , belief,open mind and hard work.
Assertion 7. It is multidimensional.  There is no one panacea. 
Assertion 8. It involves knowing oneself , defining life goals. building self learning, getting knowledge from many sources, discrimination, building methods of finding truth from many statements and deep thinking plus an urge to improve , move forward , be future ready ,and lead teams. Our upanishads emphasize this aspect a lot. 
Assertion 9. Our energy level, enthusiasm , and motivation are low. We have a strong negative mindset. Be positive. 

The first prerequisite action needed to move up the ladder:
We should have rigorous training from childhood . The training is not theory , but rigorous ,daily practice.  The training should do the following:
1.Calm the mind 
2. Contemplate ,analyse and assimilate all what is learnt. 
3. Create a regular practice of getting information from various sources ,understanding the 360 degree views of that information,  converting them into knowledge , assessing them and applying them. 
4.Cultivate regular practices to review our ideas and beliefs and break the cocoon , make us look out and look at the future . Don't accept any fact before a detailed analysis. Accepting every fact received by us makes us morons. 
5.Create curiosity and critical thinking practices. Know that you are the search engine created by god - not google- and use those powers and keep on searching. 
6.Improve cognitive abilities. 
7. Become a thinker ,not an automated machine ,not a slave. 
8.Increase the self learning processes
9 .Increase the levels of consciousness. Curiosity, eternal quest, and meditation aid  in this. 
It means that we need a separate gurukula system teaching these in the mornings and practicing the principles and doing our regular education in the afternoon. It is also needed to absorb scientific principles and go forward in science particularly abstract science and deep space dynamics. We should move away from knowns to unknowns , break the existing rules, laws , simulate the universe, go beyond mathematics or create a new mathematics ,combine many solution methods, find ways to control and guide AI. 
A tall order. That is why I said it is mental food. Just as we need food to eat everyday, we need this mental food several times every day. We get the mental food and use it before every action, every thought, every speech, every listening and every learning.
As I said, the sixth level is aspirational. So at least we should have these practices done regularly as a minimum.
Get information by reading books, listening to talks, discussing with others, assimilate the information by converting it into knowledge. This is a lifelong practice. This is also a self learning practice. This will increase your confidence level. 
Question everything. Be a good search engine.
Define a purpose in life
Review your beliefs regularly. Try to change. 
Have an open, positive mind 
Think always . Don't shut your mind to the world. 
Accept challenges. Don't run away from them . That is the problem of living in a cocoon. 

In short 
Know thyself
Know thy job, people, students, organization .
Know thy world , society, environment 
Know the future . 
Keep learning always.
Greetings
Dks
08/09/25, 7:57 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Belated Greetings for the Teachers Day!! You are a real Guru, much above the level of a teacher!!
09/09/25, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  831
We saw the people related aspects so far. Unless an institution gets a reasonable number of  faculty  aspiring to go to the higher consciousness level or do its maximum to convert most to move up - that is difficult, needs a set of a critical mass of motivated faculty - , it can't even move from a satisfactory to good level, leave alone moving to a great level. 
As the work culture is concerned, some institutions have a reasonably good intention to improve the quality. If faculty cooperate, they can move up. 
Whatever is said in the previous posts applies to most organizations, not just educational institutions only . As I have written before, I count a handful of leaders in our country whom I know personally and who moved up and built their organization without political clout. Let me list a few names. 
Prof CV Raman - determination, focus, deep research, deep thinking, commitment, clarity,
Prof MS Thacker - vision, holistic thinking, determination, grand and ambitious implementation, setting up a new department of power engineering . 
Dr Homi Bhabha - visionary , predicted future trends, built a holistic system prepared expertise
Dr Sarabhai - visionary, assembled a team, not a good implementor 
Prof Dhawan - participatory governance, futuristic, visionary, reforms orientation, holistic thinking
Prof R Narasimha - great thinker, holistic thinker, analytical mind, clarity.
Dr A Ramachandran - dedication, commitment, built people , changed IIT Madras. 
And many more.
Let me return to the next and equally important reason for mediocrity - toxic work culture. 
Now let me start with what is an ideal work culture where a thousand flowers bloom - lots of innovations happen. 
Some qualities are 
1.peaceful ,work friendly campus 
2.motivated , sincere, serious , thinking faculty 
3. Keen interest in learning and research
4. Support to open minds, thinking and hard working persons, freedom to work without interference - it shouldn't be interpreted as freedom to politicalise the campus , harmonious living , 
5. Flexible ,transparent and adaptive rules facilitating the ambience- good governance. 
6. Fairness in actions 
7. Freedom from fear. 
8.Facilities to work
Who are responsible for maintaining a good academic ambience on campus?
Both management and faculty. 
Both have important roles , Both play complementary roles. The principal is a good link and should be a good leader. Toxicity and management dominance comes when the principal forgets academics and goes with the management instead of educating the management. 
The biggest problem is low confidence level leading to a negative outlook. I saw how Prof Holla, Prof Prahlada Rao transformed RVCE and MSRIT. I saw Prof Viswanath building up a good work culture at Gogte and Prof KA Krishnamurthy trying his best to improve institutions like MCE and SSIT. I saw Prof Nityanandan building research culture at TCE Madurai and Abhaykumar working on good governance. I saw REC Trichy destroyed by a total lack of synergy between principals and faculty for decades. I saw Prof MNC bringing in good academic values into SIT. I saw Prof Alladi Prabhakar struggling to improve MIT Manipal and building a research culture. All these and many others changed the mindset of the management. 
I saw potential for good growth in several colleges ,but due to the leadership vacuum and lack of synergy , those institutions didn't move up. 
While some institutions like VIT, SRM, Crescent, Galgotia, Nursee Monjee, Symbiosis,  Amrita, grew faster, we don't have any in Karnataka with a vision to pursue growth, research culture and excellence. PESIT tried but didn't move up. 
Principals are non-entities in several colleges, highly submissive persons.
That brings to a close our look at institutional mediocrity. 
Greetings
Dks
10/09/25, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 832
Prof Vasudev Parvati has a query
-A Teacher's day special query sir, something I have always wondered:
Will apriori training (as an eligibility condition) in pedagogy and adolescent psychology help to make better teachers in higher (college and university) education?”
My response 
It is doubtful that training in human psychology will make a teacher a better one. 
What is required are a few important principles to become a better teacher. It is not enough to know the principles, but we have to follow them. 
The principles are
1.Understand what are  the functions , roles and responsibilities of a teacher ? This is left as a vague topic or mistakenly understood as repeating what is in a prescribed text  book . That is the tragedy. 
A teacher's job is to know a student ,  mold a student , to make him or her inculcate strong habits to read, contemplate, think , assimilate , apply and improve concepts. That is to make the students get good cognition capabilities. 
A student should follow a teacher. It is not a knowledge transferring activity. 
Is teaching only a classroom activity? Unfortunately ,it is made into a mechanical activity, not even an active aspect. Experimentation, discussions, reading , thinking ,practices are ignored. 
This tells us that cognition or understanding in a holistic way is more important and that is the first objective of a teacher - pass on an understanding of the world or reality as clearly as possible, as correctly as possible , as rigorous as possible,  as holistically as possible , as deep as possible and as futuristic as possible using several methods of learning . To me that is a good starting point for a teacher. I consider the above as a very important and impactful statement and I followed it as far as possible. I added one more aspect - as tough as possible , no kids glove please. Take students to their limits. So psychology is secondary here, cognition is primary. 
Ours is a country with more than 3000 years of history of thousands of gurus starting with  vedic rishis, Vyasa, Yajnavalkya, Panini,  Janaka, Aryabhatta, Bhaskara, Madhava to Shankara to Ramanuja to Madhwa and onto many  modern gurus. Most invented new sastras and interpreted old scriptures 
We remember Dr S Radhakrishnan as a teacher on September 5. Why ? Because he provided a new, complete, understandable , clear and scholarly picture of Indian philosophy. No one has done a similar thing so far. Another great person I cherish is C V Raman. He explained the difficult concepts of physics in simple terms . He explained color with hundreds of sarees. He explained light scattering with diamonds. He explained sound with many musical  instruments . He gave in depth concepts to a topic. The one difference between both is that one is a scholar , another is a researcher and teacher. 
When I visited a college under TEQIP, I was exposed to two major problems in the first visit itself. 
The first was a mindset leading to low confidence level and diffidence - the belief that we are a rural area , not like Bangalore and so we can't do anything. My job was to break this belief, not easy.
The Second was language or lack of it.
The faculty complained that students don't understand English. Students complained that faculty don't know English. So language is the big vehicle for understanding. 
Let us look at cognition next.
Welcome comments. 
Greetings 
Dks
11/09/25, 5:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 833
Let us ask : What are the steps needed to improve cognition of students?
Go for the whole before discussing parts. Build a universe of your course and its relationships with other areas.
For example,  I read the poem  BRAHMA by Emerson . It is a deep poem . I realised that it is difficult to understand it for foreigners as they don't understand the total context and circumstances. People don't know gods, sacred seven mentioned in the poem. They don't understand Brahman.  To Emerson,  contradictory terms like slayer and slain, shadow and sunlight,  shame and fame,doubter and doubt etc are no different. But what about a reader , how will he understand the similarity in these contradictory terms - a subtle aspect ? 
So a reader should get an introduction to absolute reality and maya ,their differences and the concepts of nirguna and saguna Brahman.  Then only he or she will appreciate the essence of this poem. 
So cognition comes from a whole and not a part. Most teachers teach a part forgetting the whole. Concentrate on connections and relationships. 
The same poem uses examples to prove a point. Create examples, analogies ,anecdotes, practical happenings, to explain many concepts. I always talk about many practical occurrences for me. I even discuss current political aspects to stress a point. Sometimes ,jokes help. When I used to teach programming, I emphasized the importance of sequence and logic with a simple joke. 
A philosopher goes for a party and both his neighbours were women. He was shy and took advice from his friends - what to do? His friend suggested that it is simple. Ask two questions and the women will take over . The questions are - are you married? How many children you have? He asked the first woman - are you married? She said “no”. He asked the second question - . She was upset and angry and turned away. 
He changed the order and asked the woman on the other side - how many children you have? She replied - two. He asked her - are you married?. She got angry. 
This explains importance of logic and sequencing and stays with students. 
The next important step to improve cognition is to remember and not forget. Here our students excel. Memorizing is good. Taking notes is an important necessity for not forgetting the contents of a talk or lecture. I recall an incident here. I was invited to give a talk to the faculty of an engineering college in Bangalore. I was closely associated with this college. While I was lecturing , I observed that most faculty were just sitting . I looked at the secretary of the college, a great friend of mine. He got scribbling pads and pen for the faculty members. Still they didn't write any notes. What was the use of my talk? It reminded me of an old proverb - it was like irrigating a barren and  uncultivable  land . It is of no use. 
Also the teacher should know that he or she should pause while discussing a difficult topic . He or she should repeat complex topics again and again. 
Thinking, Contemplation , abstraction, learnings, - give references to what you are teaching in each lecture, give reading assignments , ask questions to stimulate thinking. Speak slowly so as to give time for assimilation . Ask the students to write a half para of their learnings . Ask them to suggest applications. 
More In the next.
Greetings 
Dks
12/09/25, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 834
We are discussing the basics of improving teaching and teachers. We saw what the role of a teacher has. Then we started looking at the main objective of teaching - cognition. We identified four factors in the previous post. Let us look at more factors on improving cognition of students.

Computer science and management are more conceptualization oriented courses , not mathematical ones. Engineering used to be a conceptual course in the first half of the 20th century. But it started becoming more mathematical in the second half and we started ignoring the conceptual and practice part. Still civil engineering retains quite a good percentage of concepts. AI today has more conceptual part. Cognition for analytics and concepts are different. In mathematical or science oriented topics , we establish a firm foundation of rules, laws, representation by symbols and operations , procedures , processes and methodologies and use these to plough into the topics. Most of these are well defined, deterministic . So cognition is easier. That is not the case with teaching in areas like philosophy , religion , management , IT services ,AI areas. We normally have no universal rules or laws . There are multiple views , multiple approaches , multiple solutions, and it  is difficult to get clarity. Confusion prevails. So cognition here needs a different approach - detailed explanations, multiple views, their advantages, approaches , their relationships , their impacts etc. Cognition needs a discovery approach here , not an analytical approach. One size fits all works for science and mathematics ,but not to these conceptual topics and disciplines. Engineering has a lot of concepts. Our teaching methods and practices  ignore them ,and concentrate on analysis. That is a tragedy. Going with pure mathematical approaches have reduced an effective and holistic understanding of various concepts and their impacts on architecture, system integration, design, trouble shooting , diagnostics, sizing, performance, resilience and operations. So a good understanding is required on the balance between analytical and physical ideas and approaches. 
The main problem with science is it is one dimensional,  but the problems with engineering and management
 are :
They deal with multidimensional problems.
They deal with uncertainties.
They deal with multiple uses and users. 
They have multiple components. 
They deal with very large and complex problems. 
They go beyond borders- multidisciplinary.
It is a basic necessity that a teacher should spend enough time to think about the subject he or she will be teaching and create a list of topics to be taught, define their characteristics like analytical or descriptive, easy or difficult to grasp, etc, build a cognition plan accordingly and prepare teaching and reading materials.
I had a lot of difficulties in the early years of teaching . I was teaching computer science from the sixties onwards. It was evolving and changing with high speed. Text books were not available. It was a concepts oriented discipline , not mature. It wasn't easy for me to teach. I had to go on discovery. Discovery meant hours of thinking. Take the term - process. I needed to explain this to students. There is a cryptic definition - it is an instance of a program. I spent days to come up with a good set of explanations. This means that a teacher should think intensely and deeply and accept challenges,  not running away from them. It took me several years to understand entropy.  Even terms like isothermal and adiabatic processes were not explained properly and without applications . The problem here is that every teacher should ask three questions to explain a topic - why? What? and How?. 
More in the next post
Greetings 
Dk
13/09/25, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 835
“If you can dream—and not make dreams your master; 
If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim;
 If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster And treat those two impostors just the same; 
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools, Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken, And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:”
If by Rudyard Kipling 

Connecting the dots, finding applications, impacts, future developments etc. Solve problems. Write applications, design,  build devices, look for pros and cons . 
Provide clarity by discrimination - viveka. I started this by discriminating mathematics symbols. We use” = “ symbol for  two separate aspects - equality - a condition and an assignment - calculation symbol. ALGOL differentiated these two symbols . Fortran used = for assignment and .EQ. for equality. There are several such cases like differences between programs, processes, and threads ; hub, switch and router etc. There is confusion between concurrency and parallel processes. 
The second aspect of clarity is to explain definitions. Most definitions are cryptic and need expansion. Socretes and Plato emphasized on definitions . Yajnavalkya gives a long definition of Brahman in Brihadaranyaka upanishad.  
“I learned very early the difference between knowing the name of something and knowing something.”
Richard P. Feynman

The next aspect is to discuss different stages of an activity. We have several terms like goals, roles, strategies, processes, procedures, architecture , models, designs, methodologies, etc and these need clarity. 
The next aspect is to build clarity in yourself first before passing on the concepts. This can be achieved through readings, contemplation, questioning , finding answers, discussing with others, posing in quora,  deep thinking etc. 
Seeing is believing . Cognition improves by projecting videos, not by talking. Perception is multisensual- seeing, hearing, reading, experimenting , analysing etc. Perception is the important step to Cognition. 
Avoid biases. We have created an approximated and unitary way of looking at problems ,but unfortunately our systems have multiple views, uncertainties, many options, and many solutions in reality. We avoid practices of engineering , industry practices etc. Due to practicalities, medicine assumes most humans as one category and treats them. With data and AI , multiple possibilities, multiple models and experiments may lead towards individualized treatments. We need to unlearn the old axioms and learn new axioms. 
Engineering should look for creating a  detailed model for our systems rather than an approximate unitary model. Jay Forrester wrote in 1960 and 1970 books on systemic models, world Dynamics giving an integrated view of engineering , economy, population  and development . That gives a holistic picture . 

Innovate.
   Let me conclude with Sankara's explanation  of qualities of a teacher: 
“Knowledge, should be explained again and again until it is firmly grasped”
“When the teacher finds from signs that know-
ledge has not been grasped (or has been wrongly grasped) by the disciple he should remove the causes of non-comprehension.”
“The teacher is one who is endowed with the 
power of furnishing arguments pro and con, of understanding questions  and remembering them, who possesses tranquillity, self-control, compassion and a desire to help others, who is versed  in the scriptures and unattached to enjoyments both seen and unseen.  who 
has renounced the means to all kinds of actions, is a knower of Brahman and established in It, is never a transgressor of the rules of conduct, and who is devoid of 
shortcomings such as ostentation, pride, deceit, cunning, jugglery, jealousy, falsehood, egotism and attachment. 
He has the sole aim of helping others and a desire to impart the knowledge .”
Upadesa sahasri- Sankaracharya 
Greetings
Dks
14/09/25, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 836
We saw the role of a teacher first and then how the main task of making the students understand as a part of learning. 
Now let me move to the third aspect - how do you excite the students?
I have talked to thousands of teachers across the colleges and IIMs NITs and IITs in addition to IISc - a lot of my discussions were continuous over a period of time - a wide diverse group of seniors and young lecturers , some in private conversations and many in groups and belonging to many engineering disciplines and on a diverse range of topics - education, pedagogy, students, delivery, explanations, lab work, ambience, curriculum, ethics, roles and responsibilities , motivation, long term learning, habits , institution improvements - how to go from standard to good to great, improvements etc in addition to many topics in energy, environment and many areas of computer science. 
Similarly , I have talked to tens of thousands of students of different ages - high school students , undergraduates , post graduates and practising engineers. 
So I have a large sample size with me, the only drawback is that it is mostly restricted to the south with a few institutions in the west ,north and east . I lectured at  both normal colleges and elite institutions. I have taught and lectured outside India also. So my observations are based on my discussions, my observations and my learnings from these encounters.
While there are many bright people - I should assert that most faculty  start their career with a lot of enthusiasm and energy , it dissipates very fast in their perception of and influence by their college and university environment and soon they lose their confidence and hope . Fortunately ,quite a good but small percentage are determined and  feel that they should do something to improve themselves, their students and the education system. But they lack support , lose their directions and couldn't convert their enthusiasm into actions. 
So my question is 
How do such people build a better ,satisfying professional career in such a distressing atmosphere? 
The first requirement is to understand the environment one lives in.
Let me quote a saying quoted by Sir M Viseswaraya about Indians- not a complement but there is some truth in it and all our organizations have people of this type.
“Joseph Chailley says: “If India possessed a more fertile soil and were better endowed with mineral wealth, she would still languish in poverty if the natives continued to work with the same apathetic indifference as at present. Slackness is the worst curse of the country. At first sight, everybody seems to be taking an active part in some common toil; as a matter of fact, several persons are looking on at the labour of one. As has been cynically remarked, out of five people who seem to be working, one is doing nothing, one is resting, one is looking on and another is helping the previous three. Everyone endeavours to escape his full toll of toil.”
— Mokshagundam Visvesvaraya” 
Quoting a disappointing foreign criticism of Indian culture in his Address to Mysore Civil Engineers Association (14 Nov 1910). 
A country with a glorious and long tradition of great gurus like Yajnavalkya,to Sankara and more than 90000 gurulukas running till the end of 19th century gets this comment. So one thing is clear from this
We have great scholars. We continue to produce great scholars . But we have a large unmotivated ,negative minded population and the country does most activities inefficiently. We need to deal with this dichotomy. 
I have seen this situation in most government offices - there will be one or two very sincere , honest, and hardworking and helpful persons in almost every office. I know quite a few people . 
Mr RP Krishnamurthy was undersecretary to the chief minister and a very simple soul. He won't eat anything in the office. He was scrupulously honest running a high pressure office. I have seen several bank officers who were service oriented, committed to doing their job with intelligence. Let me give names of some persons with whom I worked - i am missing many names here-
Joshi, Suresh, Ramaswamy - indian bank
Kumar , Govinda bhat , Chandrasekar - corporation bank
Ravindranath, Atulkumar - syndicate bank
Kumar, Diwan, Sunil Mohan - PNB . 
Sometimes such people are trapped. I know the case of an honest subregistrar who was trapped and dismissed from service for being honest.
The second understanding is the strengths and weaknesses of our education system from the point of finding ways to identify challenges and look for solutions. Let us look at it in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
15/09/25, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 837
 “ For those who have conquered the mind, it is their friend. For those who have failed to do so, the mind works like an enemy.”
Gita 6.6

Yesterday's post doesn't give a correct interpretation of my thinking. I concentrated mostly on teachers and advices are aimed at them. 
I have met thousands of faculty, thousands of people in governments, banks, industries, utilities, corporations, computer companies,  TCS, Integra microsystems , research labs , NGOs in addition to faculty members and lakhs of students. 
I had great interactions with most of them. My interactions are through lectures, discussions, lab visits, AICTE inspections and TEQIP visits and KSCST project visits as well as talks in several conferences . The interactions were useful. Most expressed themselves fearlessly to me. 
Most faculty were serious about doing something but couldn't do it. I have worked with hundreds of officers in the Karnataka government and had very close and happy working relationships with hundreds of officers in several banks . I admire all of them. I had and have great regards and admiration for many senior IAS officers of Karnataka government, and managers to CMDs of banks. I loved working with them and it led to positive results. My relationships have been excellent and I enjoyed working with them. Most were really great visionary and thinking  people. Our discussions here are aimed at  improving the mindset of our teaching faculty in colleges. I gave a few examples to show the sincerity existing in them in difficult times  and sorry that I missed others' names . The list was long and I made a mistake in identifying a few. Please remember that I cherish my association with all my coworkers, associates , friends and acquaintances. 


Let me return to the concerns of Prof Vasudev and Prof Karunakara on teaching .
As a first step in understanding our education system ,we need to get rid of many myths we generally believe in. 
The first myth is that our students are useless, not interested in learning . So there is no way we can improve education unless we get great students. This is not true. 
We should consider students as our assets and resources. Marks are no indication of their capabilities. I advised two students to shift from computer science to physics which was their interest and they hated programming. I strongly believe that we underestimate our students and underutilize them. We think they are burdens. 
I was talking to the new students last week. Their questions showed their understanding, their futuristic outlook and their keen interest in learning.  They asked me - what books to read? How do we know what will happen in the future? What are the developments expected? How do they prepare? Why did I choose computer science in the mid sixties when there were no facilities and it was evolving? etc. So students are smart . Respect their knowledge. 
The second greatest myth is belief in the exam system as an indicator of quality. If a student fails in an exam, we declare him useless. This is a mind block. We need to move away from exams, encourage thinking. Exams are great lifelong punishments meted out without proper justification. 
Sir M V quote

"To give real service, you must add something which cannot be bought or measured with money."
It is a great advice.
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
16/09/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 838

BG 6.8: The yogi who are satisfied by knowledge and discrimination, and have conquered their senses, remain undisturbed in all circumstances. They see everything—dirt, stones, and gold—as the same.
6.9: The yogis look upon all—well-wishers, friends, foes, the pious, and the sinners—with an impartial intellect. The yogi who is of equal intellect toward friend, companion, and foe, neutral among enemies and relatives, and unbiased between the righteous and sinful, is considered to be distinguished among humans.
Gita

Let us continue with our mindset and belief systems. These are common beliefs found across the state amongst a majority of teachers. 
The big myth ,the belief ingrained in most , is - “Teaching is a class room lecturing activity and it is one directional. No interruptions ,no questions. The objective is to cover the portions . If students don't learn, they are useless. “
We need to know that for a large number of students , learning is a multidimensional  activity, a serious activity mostly done outside a classroom involving hours of work  - listening, reading, seeing, solving problems, experimenting, seeing practices, generating doubts,  questioning, abstraction, thinking  and contemplation - all routes lead to understanding. This habit is not built into the students. 
Let me explain the above through an experience. 
When we started on the mahithisindhu program of 1000 high schools in Karnataka,  that program excited a large number of rural children. We designed the program with some features to help in learning and using computers - the focus was using the computer . So there were no separate class room , minimum talking by the instructors , most learning done on a computer - practice based. 
We prepared a time table with contents focused on applications. 
The instructors were taken from BE or MCA qualified young persons trained on the use of computers and not a trained teacher. 
We focused on group learning . 
We spent days building the contents of books for 8th, 9th and 10th standards after several rounds of discussions and revisions - fortunately the vendors were private companies and listened to me as their payments depended on my approval and so did all I needed to be done - prepared the new books. All students got these books in kannada . 
After such a lot of effort, we found students excited , read the book, attendance was 100% , and students hung around the school after the school was closed for the day. That motivated them in studies and the pass percentage in SSLC exams jumped by 5% every year. So a multiplier effect was also seen here. 

The next belief is - 
A text book is a Bible. What it says is truth and absolute truth. This is a rigid mindset. 
Unfortunately , this kills thinking. This declares non-believers and doubters as failures. But the biggest drawback is that  we  create frogs in the well students  - who live in that book's  world and don't know what is happening outside.

The next belief is - 
We look at the past ,teach the past , forget the future , and forget the Dynamics, changes and transformations happening in our society ,country and world. We have created a nice cocoon for us and our students. This kills creativity and innovation. 
I want to illustrate two incidents that happened to me in two NITs. 
I was talking to some faculty in one NIT. I asked ,” why is the syllabus and contents the same for 50 years?”. The response was , “ it is time tested and so good enough for us to teach.”
In the other NIT,  I was discussing the need to update the curriculum with current trends and future proof the students. Most senior professors didn't agree with me. Only a few younger faculty were interested in my opinion. 
There is a third incident - most colleges used to teach 8085 microprocessors for about  two decades , even after 8085 became obsolete and not used anywhere. Why? I got justifications that students should know evolution. But they don't teach complete evolution here , concentrating on one microprocessor. Some of my respected friends did this without thinking and defended this practice. 
Let me end this with Sir MV
“The Indian mind needs to be familarised with the principles of modern progress, a universal impulse for enquiry and enterprise awakened, and earnest thinking and effort promoted. A new type of Indian citizenship purposeful, progressive and self-respecting should be created, and self-reliant nationhood developed.
I walked my way to good health.
It is better to work out than rust out.
Even at the age of 102 he said this as quoted in Our Leaders. Children's Book Trust. 1989.”

Greetings
Dks
17/09/25, 5:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 839
Tolstoy
 “I divide men into two  lots.  They are free thinkers, or they are not free thinkers. …. Free thinkers are those who are willing to use their minds without prejudice and without fearing to understand things that clash with their own customs, privileges or beliefs.  This state of  mind is not common, but it is essential for right thinking; where it is  absent, discussion is apt to become  worse than useless.”
Let me conclude by looking at what should be done?
Faculty members need a continuous training , spent at least two weeks every year on teaching methods, digital methods and transformations,  AI, future technologies, human science, motivation etc. They need to learn continuously . No institution will gain even a satisfactory status without a dynamic faculty group. I am not saying all faculty should be research oriented , but all faculty should be motivated to improve their knowledge , their curiosity, their thinking skills, their working style. We need to build their confidence level - it is low now.
Faculty members should own responsibility to their students learning.  They should create interest in their students , make them think on impacts , future changes, alternate approaches. They should float discussion groups. First of all they should accept that they survive because of students, and the students come with a great new perspectives and can open the faculty's mind to a different world. So interact with them as equals. Remove superiority mindset. Understand them , encourage them and support them.
Faculty should spend an hour everyday reading a good sociotechnical book and analysing them . They should build a practice of writing critiques on books and papers and publish them as blogs. Blog writing is a good way to think and improve oneself. A faculty doesn't get a lot of time to open up and discuss their ideas in a classroom. Online  Discussion groups are one good option. Blogs will reach a larger audience.
Try to analyse your beliefs and change yourself slowly. The world is changing, technologies are changing , societies are changing , so look to the future ,not past. Self reviews as a weekly habit is a good one. Eagerness to improve is a good habit. Today I see a lot of excuse based mindset with many faculty . We should move from an excuse and defensive mindset to a positive ,can do, mindset. I observed on many occasions , there is a reluctance to listen to suggestions, ideas, criticisms, etc., leave alone accepting them and acting on them. We need to look at all acquaintances and students as friends ,not enemies. 
Let us build an inclusive mindset . Engineering is inclusive . So learn social sciences , behavioural sciences . A first level social interactions project opens our mind.

These need support from the management also. These can be done with diplomacy ,not opposition. Try to convince the management. Don't expect everything you want to do to be in a book in an orderly manner.  Innovate your life .
Greetings 
Dks
18/09/25, 5:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 840
The importance of synergy and united approach. 
“Meet together, talk together, let your minds apprehend alike; in like manner as the ancient gods concurring accepted their portion of the sacrifice.”
Rig veda 10.191.2
“The place is common, common the assembly, common the mind, so be their thought united.
A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship with your general oblation.”
Rig veda 10.191.3
“One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one accord.
United be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree.”
Rig veda 10.191.4

Let us move back  to the year 1971. A few changes came up in that year also. 
The major changes were
The installation and operations of the newly acquired IBM 360/44 computer. It was located in CISL and Dr Shamim was made in charge , a few programmers were appointed and some operators. It managed the teething problems like punch cards and key punch machines, not enough. Fortunately ,most students in several departments started using the system. Most students were not familiar with Fortran. So the programmers were supposed to help them , but that was not happening. Some got ready made programs . One important noticable aspect was the large number of students and faculty queuing up for submitting their card decks and get their printouts. 
By the next year, the work load increased at a very high growth rate ,and we had to introduce a separate manual  process for  scheduling CPU time for each user. Queues started building up . This led to some favoritism in booking and a lot of unhappiness. Most were not happy with the operations of the computer system. 
The second change was the operation of the school of automation with IGS. It had great impact on me. My relationships with IGS wasn't great. We just were courteous and our relationship was transactional. But we used to discuss a lot. He loved discussions on many topics of general interest . He loved to predict the growth of organizations, particularly the new department of electronics set up by Mrs Gandhi after the department of space. 
The first set of changes dealt with my involvement in organizing short term courses for industry persons. At Prof Dhawan's suggestion , myself and Prof Thathachar floated a course on optimization . It looked at optimization of bus transport for people of bangalore.  Bangalore had about 420 buses with BTS- the public transport service. It was inadequate for a growing city. Bangalore also had almost an equal number of buses with public sector companies like HAL, ITI, BEL,HMT and most research labs . Their utilization was poor . So my suggestion was to put to use the spare time of the buses of the companies on a win win situation. Prof Dhawan took this seriously and talked to the army general. But the egos of both sides didn't lead to a solution. So Bangalore suffered with a very poor public transport system and it is there even now. 
Like Delhi, Bangalore also had a large middle class population . So they moved to scooters and mopeds . 
Greetings 
Dks
19/09/25, 4:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 841
Let me look at the methods I used to move into new areas. The computer scene was still primitive with poor facilities and little research work going on in India. 
I wanted to look at the performance of computer systems ,operating systems as well as general services. I wasn't keen on the generally accepted queuing theory models. They approximate a problem to a large extent. So I found an approach using Monte Carlo simulation. I used this for the next twenty plus years to study performance of many services including transactions in banks and distributed systems. 
I also built a simulator and a continuous system language called Cospro. Based on my work we floated a short term course on computer simulation. I started teaching a computer simulation course from the next year 1972 onwards. This course ran for the next 20 years like my optimization course and computer techniques course. I didn't teach this for many years. Later I taught this course again at IIT Bombay in 1978 79.
Another change that happened was my getting involved with the setting up of the power systems training institute. The ministry of power , government of India,  decided to set up a new training institute for power engineers throughout India and chose bangalore as the location. Mr Annavaradan , deputy director ,was posted to PSTI and came to bangalore and met me. I liked the idea as a teacher and helped in formulating a course plan. PSTI existed in paper - no building, no staff. 
Yet ,we decided to run a two week program and run in PE 303, in our department. I talked to Prof BNN Iyengar and convinced him to permit PSTI to run the program . He agreed. We didn't need approval from the registrar then. 
We framed the topics, identified experts - I took the major share of lectures - and started the new institute not with a building ,but with a course. Annavaradan  had to fight for months to get approval from the ministry for payments. One of the experts wrote nasty letters to him regarding honorarium. Anyway ,it started well. 
They found a house in palace orchards ,set up the institute and started running programs. Mr VR Narasimhan joined as the director . I was involved with this institute till 1985, more than 20 years. It was a rewarding experience teaching power engineers from various state electricity boards. Unfortunately ,Mr Annavaradan died of a sudden heart attack by 1980 or so. But the institute continued and I was involved with them . I became friends with many officers and directors. 
Greetings 
Dks
20/09/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 842
I spent helping PSTI build into a good training institution. I had good relationships with all directors like Mr VR Narasimhan, Mr Anantharamiah, Mr MM Turabi and Mr NSR Rso and many deputy directors. 
After a few years of operating from a house in Palace orchards, they moved to subramaniapura after banasankari, quite a distance from my residence. It is at the other end of the city. Still traffic was manageable. PSTI sent a car to pick me and it took me from 30 to 45minutes to reach there, unlike nowadays. 
I met Mr SS Murthy several times. I also became involved with the southern regional electricity board because of SS Murthy.  He became member power systems in CEA. 
During this decade of 1970 to 80, I was involved with Datamatics also teaching programming and systems analysis and design.
 So it was a tight decade. I was riding multiple horses and the number was increasing . I was involved with both EE and automation at the academic level, got involved with electrical  distribution system designs for Dhanbad and Delhi, was active with the curriculum committee and power committee, and later got involved with ASTRA. I also had two outside assignments during this decade - first at the University of Manchester during 1974- 75, and IIT, Bombay during 1978 and 1979. I also visited the US for  two workshops in 1977. I also got married and had two great children born in 1975 and 1976 December. I bought a house site in the west of chord road layout in 1976. 
I moved to a rented house in Malleswaram after promotion.So a very hectic period, a very productive period for teaching most computer courses, conducting research in many areas and guiding students. I also got my promotion by the beginning of 1973. 
 From 1972, I started teaching mostly computer courses like data structures, systems programming and operating systems . 
This period,  I lost a  second friend Mr Annavaradan  , the first being Mr. Chandrasekhara of Datamatics,  with whom I  had an association and friendship for more than 10 years. 

Mr Chandrasekhara helped in furnishing my house. He got me cots, steel almirah, wooden   cupboards etc. The cots and almirah are still in use in my present house. 
More in the next. 
Greetings 
Dks
21/09/25, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 843
As usual I attended several conferences in 1972 and visited TIFR for computer work and attended workshops. I visited Shillong for the CBIP research conference in June 1972 along with both Prof BNN Iyengar and Prof HV Gopalakrishna . We stayed together in one room . Prof Gopalakrishna brought a heavy suitcase. He carried many things including an electric portable iron. 
I went by train to Calcutta from Bangalore via Madras - there were no direct trains from Bangalore to Delhi, Bombay ,Calcutta and also Madurai at that time. Bangalore was a neglected city till the end of this decade.Train connections are poor. All my travels were difficult , including reservations. 
 I went to Madras and stayed with my parents there in Ellaiamman colony and then went to Calcutta.  I stayed with my younger uncle Sankaran . Then I took a flight to Gauhati and a taxi to Shillong.
Unfortunately , I couldn't eat any food there. I had a severe headache and vomiting due to the bumpy road travel  to Shillong and also local travels to nearby hills. I ate only ice cream. A few people asked me,” you say you are unwell, but are eating icecream. Is it Ok? “ I replied  that I was allergic to mustard oil smell and sensed it even in the tea. It led to vomiting.  I visited a doctor and got a tablet. 
But professionally ,it was a good conference, my talks went on well. I chaired a session ,was a reporter for another session,  and attended some working group meetings. 
I visited a power plant and several places. Shillong was a good hill station.  It was well laid out, the hotel had big rooms and that is why three of us stayed in a room. The customs were British.  Missionaries were active and most people were christians and spoke English.  Fortunately the rains were mild then. 
While returning from Gauhati to Calcutta , there was a taxi strike at Calcutta and it was with difficulty that I managed to reach the city office of the airlines and took a rickshaw to my uncle's place in south Calcutta. I was told that my mother's uncle, my maternal grandfather's younger brother, had come to Calcutta and would be coming there to see me. He was a very old person and so I was overwhelmed by his affection for me.  I left for Bangalore the next day. 
Let me look at the happenings at IISc that affected me. 
Greetings 
Dks
22/09/25, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 844
The year we are looking at is still 1972. 
The first thing I want to talk about is the need to get a good number of quality faculty in an institution and Prof. Dhawan's  role in it for IISc. 
Prof Dhawan decided to increase the faculty size by a high percentage - almost doubling the number and went through  many approaches. It was at a time when the finances were tight and budgeting allocation for new faculty members is a Herculean task. His close relationship with UGC and its chairman helped to some extent. I admired his confidence and his efforts to take people along with him and his proposals.  It was a remarkable experience for me.
 I haven't seen any directors of not only IISc but also other institutions who realised that an institution’s strength is in its faculty and devised several innovative schemes till date. Most played safe with rules and excuses.  It is a strong statement. 
He introduced the five year review and promotions scheme in 1967  and built a number of mechanisms and structures to make it an open and fair process and to reward merit . The objective was not rewarding merit . The five year review made people think and helped them bring out their merits in research, teaching, projects , new areas and social commitment. Most realised they needed to provide a great review at the end of five years. It makes the faculty bring out their best in a positive way , no petty discussions and jealousies.  It is still in practice, an excellent motivating system. 
Then he went abroad to get talents at senior levels in 1969-70 from many universities based on global advertisements.  That was the start for IISc for global search - a very useful mechanism for getting good talent from anywhere. He brought many professors from many foreign universities and many from India. This effort added about 50 senior faculty and changed the thinking process of IISc.  We got multiple views of many institutions and universities as experienced by many newly joined faculty. This took us away from the “ frogs in a well “ mindset. It led to a lot of discussions about admissions, faculty selections, faculty expectations, research , new areas , social commitments and many aspects of academic work. Our networking with many reputed institutions increased by many times. 
I realised the importance of diversity of views on many aspects of culture, organization , governance , and approaches from childhood. I observed the functioning of my primary school, conduct of temple festivals, functioning of the high school, colleges, Easun group , IISc,  and TIFR at that time. I also played a leading role in building PSTI and training programs at Datamatics,  kirloskar , PSTI etc. It gave me a broad vision and outlook and helped me in improving systems.  What helped in developing a broad view in addition to keen observations, and analysis of the activities in several places is my voracious reading habits throughout and the learnings I got from them. I will discuss about reading in detail later

The third effort was the removal of a fixed quota of faculty allocations for each department in a phased manner that was a norm set by UGC and followed by IISc. So he started conducting selection meetings at the divisional level, a departure from the practice of selection for each department on the basis of vacancies. That benefited many of us . 

There was a selection committee set up for assistant professors in all departments. That was a major discussion point for most of us. Some were worried. In the end ,some,  who weren't promoted , were upset and unhappy. I applied along with several of  my colleagues. 
Prof Narasimhan from TIFR was the only  expert in computer science. It was a joint committee for four departments - electrical , communications, automation and high voltage. All professors of these departments were in the committee. My interview lasted for nearly an hour and Prof Dhawan supported me. I  was selected for the school of automation . I also got a higher start - maximum permissible three increments. Most of us from the department got promoted . 
So I moved from electrical engineering  to the school of  automation full time, a big shift . It was a difficult decision - to move from a friendly unit to a non friendly unit. But two reasons pushed me to join the school. First, it is a promotion. If I reject it, I may have to wait for a year to get my  promotion in the EE department. Second, the scope of SA aligned with my goal of computer science,as CS is a prominent area of SA. So I moved to the school.  But,  I agreed to my commitment to teach EE courses and was involved in EE activities for the next five years. It was a major shift ,not an easy shift and I had to do a tough balancing act between the EE department chaired by Prof Joseph and automation chaired by Prof IGS , who had  a non cordial relationship to EE. 
The movement was a good decision and I got more opportunities to diversify into two other major areas and proved my strength against adversity. 
Greetings 
Dks
22/09/25, 6:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Hello
Today is the start of Sharad navarathri. 
There are four navarathris in a year. This is dedicated to three devis - Durga, Lakshmi and Saraswati. 
The belief is we come out of all our troubles, remove the evil in us , and lead a new pious happy and dharmic life with health, wealth and general prosperity. 
This year is special. Navarathri is celebrated for 10 days. 
Navarathri is special for Mysore ,celebrated with a lot of pomp and piety ,a social festival.
Wishing happiness to all
Greetings
Dks
23/09/25, 3:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 845

Let me take a break and look at two major concerns facing us, making many worry about their impact on India. 
Let me analyze both one by one. 
The first one is the uprising of youngsters in three neighbouring countries - Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and now Nepal. The question is 
Will it happen in India also?
My answer is 
It may not. The chances are low. Why?
There are many reasons. 
We are a diverse nation . Mobilizing the entire country happened only twice in the past two centuries - during the independence movement  and anti emergency revolt through ballot boxes. Both times people, not just youth but all were emotionally involved about injustice. People went against Indira Gandhi not because of the loss of democracy but because of random arrests and attacks on innocent people. People didn't tolerate injustice and disturbance to their normal life. Both times powerful leadership evolved and guided the people. Such a situation doesn't exist now. 
India is a highly resilient country. The people will adjust, innovate ,suffer and hope for better days. The faith and hope were great. Our people love challenges. We believe and  accept happenings as fate. Both opposites coexist . 
Our governments and governance ensure fairness. We have a strong judiciary to oversee our governments and ensure the proper and just handling of various public related  activities. There are many independent systems , many diverse groups ready to correct the wrongs. 
Our democracy is not weak . Our opposition is strong and agitates at every step. Youth is involved in the democratic processes. We have a stable political system. We have independent leaders in many states and corrective action is fast.
We have many systems in place , have a vibrant digital lifestyle ,and a large number of smart people with opposing views. We may be physically poor ,but mentally rich. We are a stable country ,an active community with strong religious connect and diverse beliefs . Tolerance level is reasonable. 
Still we can't deny the fact that there is unhappiness and we don't have an equal ,just and ideal country . But that situation is still a simmering one hasn't reached a critical stage. Governments do act on them to some extent. People's voice is strong and heard and not suppressed . 
The most important reason is the economic revival and food subsidies. Our governments are concerned with the welfare of the people. We have produced many welfare schemes. The rural employment guarantee program is a good example . The direct benefit transfer is a big boon. Distribution of food grains in a distributed and effective manner has reduced physical hunger. All parties play a big role in hunger alleviation.  Covid vaccination reached all - a massive operation. Concern for people is evident and perceived by common people. So the anger of youth is much less. Digitalization also helped people to move forward. 

So chances of such uprisings now  are poor. They need a lot of effort ,coordination and synergy. We went through a lot of such uprisings in the northeast, the naxal movement in many forest areas , the working of deep states , religious fights , but weathered them well . The situation is much better now even in Kashmir . So we can relax from fear but not from affirmative actions. Politicians are sitting on the edge for the next election ,not sure how people will vote. 
But it may happen if we have a brutal government.  As Krishna said in the Gita that he will appear when there is chaos and injustice in the world.  Let us hope that  a great leader will emerge when that happens. 
Greetings
Dks
24/09/25, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 846

The second situation is the Trump effect - tariffs and a high charge for H1b visa and their impacts on India. Lots of people are worried. Many think IT will bear the brunt of this attack and so onshoring of work will come down. 
The question is 
Will this high charge impact India ? Will it be high or specific sectors only ? 
The answer is 
It will impact for a short time only. We will recover . The impact on tariff will be more pronounced and affect many sectors like textiles, pharma , etc. 
How is the impact of H1b charges  ? It will be marginal. 
Nehru realised the need to strengthen our capabilities. So he talked about self sufficiency , local manufacturing and import substitution. But he closed the country to new developments in technology , and also the private sector. His mistake was the licence and permit Raj. A liberal policy was needed. We are seeing it now. 
The number of semiconductor units being set up in India is a great boost to us. Defence, railways, tractors, earth moving equipment,  electric vehicles are increasing our capacity for production of high quality systems with the latest technologies.  That will take us forward. We are way ahead in digital and AI.
This is not the first time the US is arm twisting India. It was the worst during Indira Gandhi's tenure and even part of Vajpayee's time. 
I recall that we were not allowed to import supercomputers for IISc . The government set up CDAC to build supercomputers. NAL and DRDO built parallel computers with gigaflops. Param came out of CDAC. Later TCS also started supercomputer work.  So,  it was a blessing. 
Similarly ,the US prevented sale of GSLV technology to ISRO and even prevented the USSR from  transferring the technology to India. Again we went into it seriously and developed our own GSLV engines and rockets. PSLV could send a satellite to Mars. So again it was useful. 
Even in the late nineties ,ISRO and defence could not buy oracle database. We used Sybase for ISRO work. So obstructions are common. 
All defence and research organizations suffered with US export restrictions. Prof Deekshatulu wanted a transistor to be replaced in a device in his government research organization, NRSA. I had to go to some small vendors to get it. Our IISc chemistry departments struggled to import  chemicals from the US. 
Indians love challenges and jugaad. So I am sure that we will go full steam on atmanirbharta. Already defence production has gone up by several levels. There are a lot of activities in AI and quantum computing going on and even 15 year old school students are excited and working on AI agents .  There are trillions and trillions of code to be redone and we need new AI architects, designers,  integrators and engineers. 
We took the pole position in IT services for more than 25 years. No country is near us in IT projects and operations. Already most engineering colleges have started AI and data specializations and so soon we will have lakhs of AI known people available. So no worry. I don't see the  American universities reaching our level of talent development. 
It is the enthusiasm of our youth to explore new areas that will push us forward. 
So such actions are common for the US.
The major impact of H1b visa charges will be felt by the IT sector and it will be temporary. We will bounce back. 
 IT will move from onshoring to offshoring. Already for the past five plus years ,IT companies are setting up spaceports in many parts to strengthen communications . Also we moved from GDC to GCC. There are already thousands of GCCs operating in Bangalore alone. So more work will shift to India. 
So we should go full steam on modern technologies . Quantum and AI will open up thousands of new applications. 
That sums up the impact on H1b visas. 
Actually the fundamental question of brain drain remains - should we educate and create talent pools at considerable cost and they migrate to the US with no or marginal benefits to the country. At least  those who had gone to the Middle East had sent back considerable quanta of foreign exchange and they are mostly untrained or marginally trained persons.  We give a lot of emphasis to H1b and Indian diaspora in the US and nothing about our diaspora in Fiji, Guyana , Singapore, the Middle East and other countries. We need to reflect on this .
Greetings
Dks
25/09/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 846
Let me return to my IISc saga .

Mrs Indira Gandhi set up several new science departments. Both the department of science and technology and the  department of space were  set up in 1971
Dr A.Ramachandran who was then the director of IIT Madras,  became the secretary of DST. Prof Dhawan organized a one day brainstorming session on future research areas to help DST to look forward . Dr Ramachandran participated in the morning session.  More than 150 IISc faculty attended . I also attended and talked about computer linguistics and AI in that meeting. None except Prof Dhawan showed interest. But what was striking was the fact that there was no futuristic area being proposed there or came up for discussions. There was a total lack of futuristic outlook and imagination. Instead of discussing futuristic science, discussions moved to what area we should work on for the next ten plus years. The meeting was a very useful one for most of us to know the pulse of research and development.  It was not a structured one. But many faculty members participated and gave their ideas. 
Prof AKN Reddy stressed the need at developing rural technology based research activities in the institute. I had taught a course on alternate energy sources in 1968. So renewable energy ,particularly biogas from cow dung was considered a focus area. I got interested in it. We looked at community biogas systems. 
Those discussions led to the setting up of ASTRA in 1974- 1975 at IISc. Prof Krishnaprasad became the convenor of ASTRA in the absence of Prof Reddy. I got involved with the activities of ASTRA and I produced the first annual report of ASTRA.  More on it later. 
Though I got a job in automation , there was no office space in automation. One wing of the first floor was under construction and would take a year or more to complete.  So I continued in my old office in the EE department with approval of the EE chair.  I was still teaching EE courses and a few computer courses under automation with students from EE,ECE registered for my courses. 
I was staying in the hostel in E block during 1972. I had three close friends in E block - Sivan and Raghavan  doing PhD in Metallurgy, and Palanichamy doing PhD in civil engineering. I used to walk with Sivan to Majestic every Sunday. Both Sivan and Palanichamy joined REC Trichy after their PhD. Raghavan joined IIT madras. I also used to walk with Dr  Mahishi on some days. My walking regularity and distance  increased in this period. Mr Kuppanna, hostel superintendent, helped me a lot. 
By the beginning of 1973, I had to quit the hostel after promotion as assistant professor. I started looking for a suitable house to stay in. Mr Harihar of IC Engines department suggested a house in Malleswaram 11th main and 13th cross and helped me in getting it for rent. It was next to the Cluny convent and the railway line. It was on the first floor of a house with four flats. I took the house and moved in. I stayed in this house till 1985 December, a long time. 
At that time, it was a quiet area with a number of big bungalows and open spaces and no traffic,an ideal place to live. It was about 2kms from my department. So I walked to the institute everyday. My eating habits changed. I ate lunch at the mess but both breakfast and dinner were irregular , hotels , canteen or home. By this time ,we had a canteen opened by Mr Babu Rao from the airlines hotel giving good quality food and coffee. So I frequented that cafe regularly for tiffin and coffee. 

By this time, I worked on a conceptual framework for real time power system control using digital computers and submitted a paper to CBIP. The session was held in Madras and my paper got a great response from most people. I had met Prof Sethuraman of IIT Madras in previous CBIP meetings . He was there in this CBIP research session also. The conference was organized on a grand scale. We were put up at the hostels in Guindy. The  Inauguration was in Poondi , a very difficult program with a huge crowd attending the inaugural. We didn't get a proper lunch. We had dinner one day in the Connemara hotel and  another day  in Vijaya Gardens- it is gone now. We also had a reception in the Raj bhavan in Guindy. I met Mr Easwaran , director ,Easun Engineering , in the Raj bhavan.  It was a great ,lovely meeting. My parents had moved to Katpadi by then. 
I attended the conference with sponsorship  from the EE department even though I had moved to automation.  Our paper got the gold medal. I attended the research session. It grilled Prof Gopalakrishna on misuse of funds. I was made convenor of a new working group on power system control. 
Mr SS Murthy introduced me to the TNEB chair and wanted me to meet the superintending engineer at Basin bridge thermal power plant and suggest use of my optimization methods. I went to the basin  bridge ,met the SE. He thought that I am too young and he knows better about his plant. So the meeting was not fruitful.
Greetings
Dks
26/09/25, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 848

In April 1973, I got another good news that I was selected for the commonwealth scholarship. I didn't apply for it but Prof Dhawan recommended my name. Prof SN Rao had gone to England the previous year.
I chose to go to the University of Manchester. 
I had to send an application to the British council suggesting university names ,area of work and a writeup. 
I prepared the application and submitted it through the registrar. I chose operating systems as the area of work and wrote about my interest in scheduling. I chose Manchester as my first preference and Cambridge as a second one. I got confirmation after a month.
 
The time was limited and I had to leave by September 1973. I needed to get a passport and get necessary approvals. But more importantly, I was teaching two computer  courses and alternate arrangements were not possible. So I wrote to the British council seeking permission to join by jan1974. I got the permission . 
I informed the institute and asked for approval. The registrar wrote a critical remark on it while seeking the director's permission . The director approved my request. I got a call from our deputy registrar ,Mr Nanjunda Rao. So I went to his office. He showed me the file containing my request, their note and director's approval. The director has instructed the registrar to show me their remarks. 
I couldn't decipher why Prof Dhawan wanted me to see the office note. Was it a mild warning that I shouldn't take such a direct approach in future? Anyway ,I got the clearance to leave by jan1974. 
As I didn't have a passport, the next thing I did was to apply for a passport. It was simple. I got an endorsement from the institute to the regional passport office stating that it is an approved official visit. There was no passport office here. I applied to the Madras office. Without any difficulty and without long delays, I got my passport. That hurdle was through.  I didn't know about other hurdles at that time. Many came my way afterwards. 
The first was personal. My grandmother was upset. I went to Tirunelveli and met my uncle and grandmother . I had to promise to get married so that I can proceed to England. The old belief which Gandhi faced , seems to permit even at that time. They thought that I may get spoiled in England. So I agreed to marry. It was to be an arranged marriage. Many in the institute tried to get me married ,but I wasn't keen and so those efforts didn't succeed. 
My marriage was conducted in September 1973 in Thiruttani. It was all done in a hurry.  I just went a day before the marriage and returned two days after marriage. Since I had a house,it was easy to set up the house . 
I didn't have gas then. I applied for gas. I was told it will take a year to get a gas connection. So I talked to Mr Harihar and got an electric coil stove for cooking. 
Since many  friends kept asking me, I arranged with help from Annavaradan for a reception at the Rotary hall of friendship . It was a simple get together . I got a contractor to supply food with the help of Mr Chandrasekhara. My uncle ,Dr Ramakrishnan was luckily in my house at that time . So he also attended the reception. More than 200 people attended the reception. He left for Pondicherry in the night. The reception went off well. 
Will continue in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
27/09/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 849

I realised that the conditions of my life were changing. I learnt that business as usual is dead. I always felt that an assistant professor should achieve at a higher level and the professor should teach a still higher level of activities. I felt that I had to build a new profile as an assistant professor. I should widen my knowledge base, go deeper, get deeper in research and reach out to peers. But a lifestyle change was an immediate requirement.
I quickly adjusted to the changed circumstances -  my personal life- setting up the house , buying furniture , household items etc ;  my teaching at EE and a new course on simulation ;  new assignments and adjustments on working in two diverse and difficult environments that existed in EE and SA;  as well as my lectures at PSTI and Datamatics.
I should discuss my difficulties in the institute here. 
While EE had a harmonious group of faculty with no agenda and with traditional values mostly except Parthasarathy being a bit distant , SA had IGS working with a plan and an agenda. I was part of most activities in EE and was involved in most developments, that was not the situation in SA. IGS built a group of faculty who listened to him - three IITK persons, and three who joined from EE and ME - , and created his close circle. Others were not part of this circle and stayed as separate entities . I belonged to this external group. My relationship with IGS wasn't a great friendly one. It had its strains. I realised that aspect even before taking up my job at SA. He didn't like my association with EE , he didn't like my teaching courses in EE and he wanted total loyalty to him and the school. He saw my loyalty spread everywhere in the institute. He didn't like that.
I felt that life is not a simple black and white situation. It has its complications and uncertainties. I realised that your talent and work takes you up to a point . Beyond that level, relationships, people's opinions, people's beliefs and biases matter a lot for making life acceptable to us. Some  I was to be prepared for a new way of living in my world and not in the school's world. My world ,I decided, had to build connections outside the school to build a good academic strength in me and protect me. I built a strategy and  started working on it. I was already involved in many institute activities like hostel wardenship, curriculum committee membership ,time table committee convenorship ,power committee chair etc. I felt that I should improve my network and started working in that direction seriously. 
I had a lot of interactions with Prof Krishnaprasad during our time table committee days and it brought me into contact with faculty in CTS like Rajaraman and Madhav Gadgil as well as AKN . I had good working relationships  with professors R Narasimha, AK Rao ,AR Vasudevamurthy,  T Ramakrishnan ,CC Patel, HR Cama - biochemistry- and many others. Prof Dhawan liked me. I became close to Prof CS Vaidyanathan . We became coffee friends visiting the cafe regularly. I stopped going for coffee with colleagues in the school till 1979. That coffee friendship with CSV  continued for decades . I had great support from our administration and I had a good relationship with Dr BS Subba Rao.  I also was in harmony with the other professors in the school - Prof Deekshatulu, Prof SN Rao, Prof SV Rangaswamy ,Prof EV Krishnamurthy and later Prof MRC. Prof GK joined this group. Most of the  professors developed a cold relationship with IGS. 
Prof Sana from the University of Chicago was visiting the school and I was close to him. We discussed several social and technical  topics . He was one of the first whom I met in the guest house with my wife after my marriage. He commented on my marriage invite, liking its simple wordings . 
My network with many outside companies like  Kirloskar electric company, Tata electric company, the electricity boards, HAL, NAL, CPRI,SREB , defence research labs  etc. So I had a big network both inside the institute and outside.  So I wasn't lost . I was well known inside and outside. Lastly, I also got support from students. My PR at the Institute is great and so IGS ,whose PR is poor, needed me to get things done in the workshops , hostel and mess , admin, and in other  departments, even arranging talks and courses , coffee supplies etc . 
When IGS realised my network and the support I got from many including the director , his approach towards me changed from opposition to a neutral level. His knowledge and contacts at the institute was poor. Same is the case with the faculty in his inner circle. He used to query me on the happenings in the institute afterwards for decades.
I got involved in the recruitment of mechanics for the new workshop in SA to improve my acceptance with IGS.
Greetings
Dks
28/09/25, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 850
  I had some hurdles with my Manchester visit. First,  the government put up stringent conditions for foreign travel and we needed approvals  . I needed to apply to three ministries and get their clearances. It took months to get it. Secondly I needed RBI clearance for foreign exchange. I needed health checkups and inoculations, and a visa from the British consulate at Madras. It was a series of activities. 
I needed to clear the approval problem. Since I got the scholarship from the government,  I thought I didn't need the approvals. So I wrote a letter to the director. He asked the registrar to phone Delhi and check up about the need for approval. I sat with the registrar and he got confirmation that I didn't need approval. So that major hurdle was gone thanks to prompt action by the director and the registrar. Both took personal interest in me. 
I was eligible for sabbatical and applied for sabbatical leave and got it approved. I went to Madras and got my visa without any difficulty. I also got my vaccination done and got a  certificate. Next was ticket booking. I got a ticket to London - Bangalore to Bombay by Indian airlines and then to London by British airways. It was a one way ticket. 
Next I needed foreign exchange. The Indian rupee was worthless outside India. I had to go to the main SBI branch in MG road and I was told that I can get only 18 pounds in travellers cheques. If I wanted more, I should get a sanction from the RBI. So I just got 18 pounds with fingers crossed hoping there will be arrangements by the British council at the London end. 
Then I needed to find a place to store a large quantity of my books in my office in the EE department as I had to vacate it. I went to Prof Joseph ,asked him whether I can keep my books and papers in the two Godrej cupboards that I was using. He permitted and told me to shift the cupboards to the lab so that the office  space would be given to someone else. I did that . Later on,  he told me that there were objections from some senior faculty in EE for permitting me to retain the cupboards. So he told me that I should vacate the cupboards immediately after returning from England.  I promised to do so. 
The second problem was packing - what items  to take with me and what items to send with accompanied baggage. I took more food items and less dresses. I didn't have a top coat. So I decided to put on a sweater - a thick one - and a woollen jacket. 
The next problem was - what to do with the rented house? I didn't want to leave it and thought it better to retain it. So I looked for a short term tenant. I got Mr Lakshminarayan who was constructing a house nearby. 
I left alone in jan2024 by a morning flight to Bombay.  Security check was introduced by then and visitors can't go beyond the security point. Previously visitors can stand outside and bid farewell till passengers get into a plane. 
I got accommodation in the sun and sand five star hotel on the Juhu beach. Mr Bukebag met me in the evening . I did some last minute purchases including two Bedekars pickle bottles.
I went by taxi to the airport by 730am. At the check-in counter , a policeman was waiting for me. I was worried. Fortunately it was a mistaken identity.  Check-in and security  were fast . But customs were terrible. They checked your items, and cash with you. I was told that they took away the cash and so it would be desirable to  keep it a secret place and not tell them. So I cleared customs after they opened my checked in suitcase .  Then  I boarded the flight  . The flight had two halts and reached London by 4pm local time. 
Surprisingly I had no recollection of that travel - what I ate except a great experience of drinking refreshing orange juice several times. The juice was tangy and I liked it . I drank a lot of juice in Manchester during my stay. That was the point I picked up  the habit of drinking juices. 
I was received by a representative from the British council. He gave me 10 pounds, took me to the Indian YMCA and told me that another person would come on Monday morning to take me to the British council office to complete the formalities. 
Continued in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
29/09/25, 4:46 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 851
Mr Uday Singh comments :
“Your narration of your foreign travel brought me to reminisce my own first foreign trip in 1975 to the then USSR. The only difference being I was allowed only 8 USD, rest of the bureaucracy was identical. It seems we lived in an era which was radically different from today - so nice, quick, technology based. But, value system has gone under radical changes - for the worse.”
Thanks , Uday. 
People won't remember these situations and  troubles now . These kinds of situations helped in good practices like future proofing, planning, preparedness, good communications, etc and good values like frugality, honesty, politeness , language, living within one's means without borrowing, hard work culture, reading, thinking,  satisfaction ,  etc. 

I was comfortable staying for two days in the Indian YMCA. I was alone, no one talked to me. I got breakfast and dinner. The food was Kerala style. I spent time watching TV in the common room - mostly sports like soccer and show jumping. 
A lady from the British council came at 9 am on Monday morning. I checked out and paid my dues,the result being  no cash left .  It was a cold February day , the temperature was around 3°c. I didn't have a top coat. But they were satisfied with my sweater and jacket ,and advised me to buy a top coat. We went to the British council office. The officer I met was a srilankan.  I was given an advance and told that they had booked a hotel in Rusholme in Manchester. I took a train to Manchester with my luggage, and reached around 100pm. I went by taxi to the hotel and checked in. The locality was Pakistani and the hotel was not great ,but the room was clean and good. 
I left immediately to a nearby branch of a  bank - NatWest bank and opened an account. I took a bus to the University. The bus facility was convenient and frequent. So travel was easy , but costly. The running cost of a car was less expensive than the fare for a bus travel - opposite to the situation in India. The postal services were fast. But I needed to use a public phone booth for calling people, offices and offices. 
I went to the University and joined duty. I met Prof Derrick Morris with whom I was to work. He told me briefly about the operating system and my work. It was a new experience working with someone. I met Dr Capon ,a faculty in the department . I did all my correspondence with him. He showed me the facilities, the faculty tea area and the office items delivery centre.  He  took me to my office space on the mezzanine floor. Two of us shared the office room, the other person being a PhD student. There was no departmental office unlike in India. So I didn't know whom to reach in case of need. I had to go to Dr Capon only,but I didn't want to disturb him. I thought I would learn from others as the time passed.
Then Dr Capon introduced me to two Indian students - T Visvanathan from ISRO and RD Kumar from IIT Bombay.  
More in the next
Greetings 
Dks
30/09/25, 5:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 852
I am still on working day one in England.
Let me talk about the department. Both the University computer centre and computer science department were in a dark red building. The centre had a CDC 7600 computer.
The building was heated by  the computers , no separate heating system was installed. I liked that and found the temperature comfortable. 
The department had a long history of designing , building and operating its own computers - the last one was called Atlas. It was modern and futuristic  for its period . Atlas was a popular working machine with many advanced features . It was operated and maintained in three places by the department for several years. It was designed by Prof Kilburn FRS. I enjoyed talking to Prof Kilburn regularly during coffee time in the faculty room. 
 Then   in 1973,  the team designed an advanced mainframe known as MU5. I found it operational in 1974. A large number of students , both graduates and research students, were working on systems programming. 
Actually , I saw one big difference between Manchester and most of the western universities and TIFR. The big ones worked on hardware design in the sixties , but mostly shifted to many theoretical areas,   operating systems  , software methodology , automata , data structures as the US universities felt that these are the modern areas and it is easier to publish. This belief minimised engineering and technology focus and concentrated on mathematical work . It was definitely high class as I appreciated Denning’s work on the working set theory and his exposition on virtual memory . But Manchester university persisted on applications research, had a very strong hardware group and a  large systems programming and OS group. The students used ALGOL and Fortran was getting popular then. But I found ALGOL a great language. The Americans didn't accept it then but later built Pascal and much later C - both discarded Fortran's structures and used ALGOL's structures. 
The department undertook very little theory work. So it was a revelation and learning for me that such application work is possible and meaningful . I felt that I should personally undertake application research with a strong theoretical base and followed it throughout my life . Mathematics was important but secondary , application was primary. My PhD work shows this clearly. 

We didn't use the University computer but used MU5. It was the most advanced machine of that time . It used virtual memory, large pipelining, and the concept of a kernel of  an operating system was introduced there even before the  Unix OS  came up later. ICL, the only computer manufacturing company in England bought the rights of MU5 and designed and built its new range machines based on MU5 features.  It graduated from the 1900 series to the 2900 series of computers . Prof Morris designed , rebuilt and repaired the operating system. Two features of the OS impressed me :
1.It was a modular OS with a kernel called MUSS , which was locked in the core memory and a number of functional units known as supervisors . Virtual memory was used with paging . 
2.It was designed using both a high level language called SPG - systems program generator and a low level assembly language. 
Based on user feedback and system usage measurements - a monitor was built in the hardware to sample and record details of use, the OS was redesigned regularly to improve its efficiency . 
I collected a number of manuals to read and two new languages to read and practice. 
Greetings
Dks
01/10/25, 4:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Hello
Sharan navaratri is a meaningful celebration. It makes you think and act wisely. 
It combines many forces to destroy a big evil.
It combines women power to destroy evil.
It combines education, energy and wealth- resources to eliminate evil. 
The evil is in us, not outside - evil thoughts, evil actions, evil mind, evil beliefs, negative thinking etc. 
Today is mahanavami  , ayudha puja, Saraswati puja. Pray to get synergy of all to destroy the many evils.
Greetings 
Dks
01/10/25, 4:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 853
There was another task pending on the first day - to establish contacts with the local British council office.  
After completing the formalities in the department,   I left by bus to Baltimore road to the local British council office around 400 pm . I got a contact person with a phone number. I gave my bank account details. My payments would be sent to my account. Normally payments were done on a weekly basis, not on a monthly basis as in India. After that ,I returned to the hotel by 5: 30 pm . 
It was the first working day for me in a totally unknown place with unknown culture in a foreign country. It started in London and ended in a hotel in Manchester. I could achieve many things, I learnt a lot about living in Manchester and work requirements quickly. Everything happened by clockwork precision without any hiccups. It was a very satisfying working day for me. I quickly adjusted to a new type of life . I never thought I would adjust like this. My experience of living in Bombay during my TIFR visits had trained me to adjust to new ways of living . The fear of the unknown was reducing. 
I didn't know what to do for dinner. There was an “Indian “ restaurant run by a Bangladeshi near the hotel. So I picked up a Nan and curry and ate in the hotel. I bought some groceries - juice, chocolates etc for use. 
I slept well . 
I had breakfast the next day in the hotel . The place smelled awfully with the frying of bacon. I couldn't stand the smell. So I quickly had toast , boiled eggs, orange juice and coffee and left for the University. 
Let me talk about the University. I was disappointed that the University was a set of buildings, not a campus . The buildings were located in the main road and adjoining roads. We were close to the city centre- downtown as Americans call it. Fortunately , there was a precinct centre next to the department. I can buy some food items there. There was a branch of my bank and I transacted all my business throughout the year in that branch and never visited the branch where I opened the account, the city wide network was good. I was given a cheque book ,but no passbook. I used to get statements from the bank. I got a credit card after a few months. 
There was a refectory nearby where I took lunch in the beginning. The students union was close by. The coffee here was cheaper- less than half the price elsewhere . So I used to buy coffee and cakes here. 
The city centre was close by ,about a km away . Initially I went by bus ,but later I walked to the shopping area mostly. 
So I went , found a large number of department stores like Marks and Spenser, C and A etc and bought a top coat. I also bought an A to Z book - a map of the city , a very useful book.  
Now I had to hunt for a house to stay for a year, the hotel stay is restricted to a few days. I went to the housing office and collected about four places . I went round a few in the evening , didn't find anything suitable, and went back to the office for more options. This went on for a few days. Then I settled on a bedsitter in a locality called Withington, a good locality,on the bus route . It was on the same road leading to the University and city centre in one direction and the British council in the opposite direction . It passes through Rusholme. I walked to the University during summer.  It was pleasant to walk in summer. 
There was a library close by which I visited regularly and borrowed a lot of fiction . Close to the library ,there were many shopping places and I did my shopping there.  The landlord was Mr Khurshid, a Pakistani, a nice person. I paid the rent and moved into the bedsitter , with a common bath room . He promised to get me a one room flat with a kitchen and bath in two months. I continued to stay  in this place till I left Manchester in Feb 1975. 
The weather was gloomy, raining occasionally and cold - 2 to 4°C mostly.  Since it was  winter, it used to get dark by 2pm . It was dark in the morning when I left for the University at 9am. 
Greetings
Dks
02/10/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 854
I met both Kumar and TV on the second day . They were helpful and gave me a lot of hints. 
The department had many foreign students in the PG program but had only a few Indian students, two for PhD and one in MSc in addition to me and I found a  similar situation in the University also, not many Indian students. Most Indians whom I met during my stay were there on a commonwealth scholarship. This situation is different now. 
After moving into the house , I went to a notary, got an affidavit done regarding my status and accommodation so that my wife would get a visa easily. The affidavit cost me  a fortune - equal to a week's salary. 

I met Mr Nanjunda Rao ,our deputy registrar,  in the precinct centre one day by accident and found out that he was attending a short training program in the overseas communications services.He was staying close to my house. He took me to a prayer hall located in the adjoining street on Sunday . But that was the only time I visited the prayer hall. 
I got my two unaccompanied bags after a month . It came to London. I had to make arrangements to transport it to Manchester and I took it home. It was expensive. The janitor was in Bangalore during the second world war and was familiar with India. He remembered his days in India.  He commiserated with me about the high cost and said transportation would be much cheaper in India. He used to talk to me often. 

My wife got her UK visa ,booked her ticket and was expected to arrive here  one month after my arrival. I went to London, picked her and took the night coach -bus to Manchester. We reached by 4am ,and took a cab home. 

Later I met many Indian students like Mr Keshava Rao in the English department,  Dr Rangan in the mathematics department , both on short training assignments and several others.

I met two important people, both had the same name- Narayanan-  and both were alumni of IISc.  Both were working in the civil engineering department of UMIST. One Narayanan was from Delhi college of engineering and was working in the structures lab ,another Narayanan was a hydraulics faculty working on fluid mechanics and continuum equations. I became close to both of them. We visited them a few times. I was in touch with the hydraulics Narayanan even after leaving Manchester. 
I had another encounter with Prof Dogra , my first was at IIT Delhi in 1967 when he was the director. This time he was the education attache with the Indian embassy. He came to Manchester and we were invited to a meeting with him. He didn't show any interest in our discussions and wanted to go to Old Trafford to see a cricket test  match India was playing against England.  
 Another person we met in Manchester was Dr Padmanabhan working for his FRCS . They were living closeby. When I met him , his father-in- law was also with him. They  left for India after a  month and we got his old TV . 

We had a high degree of socialization, visited the houses of kumar and TV regularly. Later Kumar moved into a house near ours. We met several Indian scholars and visited their houses. 
I attended some  lectures by Frank Sumner and participated in the programming course conducted for the first year students . They were taught both Algol and Fortran. 
Greetings 
Dks
03/10/25, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 855
I found it not easy to make people understand vegetarianism in England. Even vegetable soup may have either meat pieces or lard  in it. Margarine had fish oil.  It was a big task to explain vegetarianism to many people. So I avoided eating outside. 
But there were many receptions held in Manchester, Liverpool, London etc .I had to participate and I found it difficult to eat anything there. Even pies were not always vegetarian. The habit of looking at the ingredients started at that time. Also I used to read about food in many magazines to understand the contents. I wanted to eat chips but definitely not fish . But the doubt that the chips may not be vegetarian lingered in me. So I never ate chips in England. 
I made it a habit to eat bread ,butter, cakes , and many fruits , and drank juice. Some local varieties of rice from south east Asia were available . So we used that rice for cooking. I made tomato soup. We had taken a pressure cooker from India. We liked yoghurt ,so I bought a lot of yoghurt cups . There were not many types of  vegetables available. Potatoes and tomatoes were available. They became our staple food. Nuts like almonds were available . Milk was delivered home every morning in bottles. A milk van came to the houses. Coffee was mostly instant coffee. I also bought and used  oval tin regularly , a childhood memory. I started eating boiled eggs regularly . 
My lunch was usually bread with pickles or jam. We tried to grind rice and black gram dhall in a grinder ,but we didn't get good dosas. So we didn't prepare dosas regularly. Chapati flour was available in an Indian shop run by one named Patel. I bought a huge bag. We used that to make chapatis regularly. 

That year saw  a number of social turmoil happening in the UK. Idi Amin threw away Indians from Nigeria and most landed in England.  England had a large number of Punjabi Indians living there at that time . The Indians from Africa were Gujaratis. While most Punjabis had low paying jobs, most Gujjus set up shops and made money. So there was a simmering friction between both groups. Indians and Pakistanis lived together without any problems.  Most Indian restaurants were taken over by Bangladeshis. 
There was a much serious unsettled problem in Northern Ireland.  The British government split Ireland into two parts and kept Northern Ireland with it while giving freedom to the main Ireland. This led to fights between catholics and protestants in northern Ireland.  Bombing was happening occasionally. 
There was a lot of poverty as pay was low for most categories of jobs. Coal mine workers went on strike. That led to a severe energy shortage. 
England actually started reducing dependence on coal use in houses for heating by the sixties.  We knew about cities like London from Sherlock Holmes . We have heard about pie soup thick  fog and poor visibility. By banning the use of coal, the city atmosphere improved during winter. Visibility was much better. Buildings were free of soot and cleaner. But coal was used mostly in power plants . Britain didn't have any hydro power and nuclear power was just coming up. So if coal was not there ,then no electricity. The coal miners strike led to energy shortage . People were advised to reduce electricity consumption. So they were unhappy.  As a consequence , the conservatives  lost the election and labour under Harold Wilson came to power. He seemed calm and practical. He said after winning the elections that he has work to do. Things improved afterwards . Watching the royal practices and parliamentary proceedings were fun. I saw the keen interest by people in sports and budget. Budget analysis which is common now in India was a big activity in England in 1974 itself. 
Manchester had two soccer teams and United was the addiction to a large crowd then. It lost that charm now. Now the city team  seems to be doing better. Betting was  common. 
The most impressive service then was the NHS - national health service . We became members, were attached to a doctor in the neighbourhood, medicines were cheaper and it was good. The government gave free nutrition supplements to poor people. 
Piped gas was used for heating and or cooking. 
Though many houses had moved to central heating using gas and boilers with hot water circulating in pipes ,some had a separate room heater . The old concept of burning wood in a fireplace was extinct then.
Greetings
Dks
04/10/25, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 856
N Ramanathan looks at the difference today.
“This one captures many interesting things then prevailing. Global availability of goods and services one needs anywhere is a boon to current generation.”

My response
Thanks
That is one view and very correct one. Another view is a continental view - what we do is right. What we eat is correct. How we live is correct. All other approaches to life are wrong. We know everything. You don't know anything. You are primitive. We are advanced. 
That was a strong colonial perception which we believe even now. I saw the lifestyle at that time when western powers were very much at a high point . But I saw one major change that happened after the second world war - Russian thinking , approaches and life style. Russian power threatened Europe and led to very strong McCarthyism in the US. So two camps started developing then ,but Africa and Asia were still ignored. 
Let me continue my perceptions of England then in 1974. 
Many  students were agitated about apartheid in South Africa and were canvassing support to attack apartheid and the regime in SA. I sympathized with their objective, but couldn't do anything meaningful. 
I had a new addiction - watching serials , movies and news on two TV channels. India didn't get a TV broadcast till the beginning of the eighties.  Cable was unknown even in the UK. There were primarily two BBC channels , government owned and ITV ,a private channel. I used to watch TV in the students union . The habit at that time was that most people were smoking. Even my dress used to smell of smoke. Even on flights, a lot of people smoked. It was a big national addiction . It took decades to bring down that smoking habit in the UK and US.
I saw many Laurel Hardy movies and many social and detective series. I used to see the saint series starring Roger Moore on Saturday at 12: 30 am, a late night program. My introduction to jazz happened at this time.  I liked several contests, quizzes and science programs. Scientific explanations of common happenings were simple and easy to grasp. They were excellent. 
I didn't miss my reading habit. I used to visit the public library and borrow many books - fiction, detective novels, history, biography, technology in general, geography, markets and products etc. I used to read a lot of magazines and journals. One I remember now was called “which”. It contained information on many products that were available in the market and compared different brands - useful to buy. I also borrowed books from the University library . I used to read most computer journals there - IISc didn't have many computer journals including ACM journals at that time . I started this habit in TIFR during my visits to TIFR. I loved reading ACM computing surveys which I  continued for several decades. I got a lot of data and incidents from software journals that improved my knowledge on software methodology, programming models and designs and modularity concepts. That habit I continued throughout my life. 
All these readings broadened my knowledge, sharpened my understanding and made me technically strong. 
My daily walking got reduced during the winter. I decided to walk to the shopping areas , library , city centre and UMIST ,etc during the spring season . I walked a lot - mostly to the University- during summer. The one problem was regular rains happening in unexpected times and I was prepared for that with an umbrella. So I was hanging on to the habit of walking. 
Another habit I picked up from my friends -Kumar and TV - was pub visits. Draft beer was good. 
Actually it was Mr Desai, manager of WH Hardy and co, who introduced me and Nanjunda Rao to a very mild drink - Cinzano Bianca. Later drinking beer was a part of socialization. The beer was not a bottled one and it was known as bitter locally. The pub was a great socialising place for most people. It was a typical British institution. 
Greetings 
Dks
05/10/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 857
In the summer, we visited several places in England. I visited Liverpool for a one day meeting, going in the morning and returning by night. Then we visited the lake district. We have all read the poems of Wordsworth.  I always admired his description of natural beauty. We saw many lakes and beautiful gardens in a vast expanse. It was beautiful. 
Jodrel bank observatory was close by . It was a big radio telescope. I went and saw this observatory. We saw the famous airshow at Farnborough. 
I gave a talk in a Rotary club about life in India.  One question that dominated was the caste system in India. The second one was on poverty in India. The third was a concern for protein deficiency amongst vegetarians. The meeting was simple, no big eating party unlike in India. The person who came to my house to take me to the meeting was a grocer. We discussed the disappearance of grocery businessEngland ,a topic discussed in the news channels due to the advent of large departmental stores and their popularity. Local grocers were loosing business. India has resilience - grocers still survive despite malls first followed by ecommerce now. 
We visited Blackpool to see the lights , a nice sight. We spent three days in London. I met Dr Virmani ,a faculty in the Polytechnic. TV lived in his house. He owned a house in London and it was unoccupied. He allowed us to stay in his flat in London. We traveled mostly by tube. It was convenient. We have read a lot about London through English literature. We lived in those mentioned places. We walked through HydePark and saw many soap box orators talking to empty audiences mostly. I never believed in the existence of this practice of speaking until I saw several people talking there. 
We saw the change of guards at Buckingham palace, visited and saw the 222B Bakers street Building, the supposed residence of Sherlock Holmes. We went to the tower of London exhibition and saw the Kohinoor diamond. We saw 10 Downing street and Westminster, the seat of the British parliament.  We went to Madame Toussads and saw the wax statues looking very real. We didn't have time to spend in the different museums. 
We couldn't visit Paris - tickets by train ,bus and air were unavailable.  
Greetings 
Dks
06/10/25, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 858
Let me add a new and major development that happened to me in Manchester.
I had met Dr Humphrey from the EE department of UMIST in Bangalore in 1973. He was working on load flow solutions. So I went to UMIST to meet him. Since promotional opportunities were poor in the UK, he applied and got a professor's position in Australia and would be moving there in a short period. He invited me for lunch at an Indian restaurant.  I agreed and we met and had lunch in a restaurant. I realized how British loved curry at that point. I heard the name vindaloo for the first time. It was a good learning activity for me to know the situation in UK academics.
I met Dr Sinha from IIT Delhi who was visiting UMIST then. UMIST was close to the University- about half kilometers away from my department. Dr Sinha was about to leave for India. I met Dr Barney , a senior faculty in the control systems centre , with him. After learning about my work , Dr Barney said that it would be most appropriate for their centre to have me and so requested me to get associated with them. I agreed and started spending some time in the control systems centre  at UMIST. I guided two MS students jointly with Dr Barney. My association was just a semester long with UMIST.  I learnt a new procedure in discussions with students. Students were required to maintain a notebook to record action points discussed during each meeting and students compliance on each point to be recorded by the student. It was a useful tool for project students. I feel that this is a practice that can be adapted everywhere and compliance can be easily established. One person I saw who followed the practice of taking notes during every meeting is Dr Nirmal Jain,TCS. He had several notebooks full of records of his discussions.  It was remarkable and I admired him. This quality  is the stepping stone and an essential requirement for proper understanding and decision making. 
I enjoyed my association with UMIST. It gave me a different view. While the computer science department of the University  focused on solving practical problems of building large systems, the centre at UMIST was dealing with more theoretical problems. 
I attended a special farewell dinner in July 1974 in London.  Fortunately, the vegetarian concept was known to the organizers and I got some good food. I spent a night in a bed and breakfast unit in London and returned to Manchester the next day. 
Another hobby that I cultivated while in the UK was photography. I did buy an instant clicking camera first and experimented with it, but wasn't happy with the photos taken from it. So I did more research, read books and understood that I needed an SLR camera with good lens and good focusing capacity even for near photos. Further research led me to buy an inexpensive but pretty good Russian SLR camera - zenith is the brand name. I found that printing films to hardcopy was quite an expensive activity. So I started putting photos in slides. The processing was very cheap. I started clicking everywhere and got hundreds of color photo slides. I bought a viewer and a projector. 
Let me discuss a major use of my camera later in India in the next post.
Greetings 
Dks
07/10/25, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 859
Later when I was back in India , I used the camera to produce a photo that became an important memory point for my friend, Mr Thimme Gowda. After returning to India , I found that Mr Gowda had moved to his house in Subramanyanagar , close to my house in 11th main, Malleswaram.  He requested me to take a photo of his family. I took a photo and printed it and gave it to him. Later that year, his son fell from the terrace and died. Thimme Gowda broke down. The photo taken by me was the only one capturing his son with others.  Later he asked me to take an enlargement of his son from that photo. I requested Marutisha of EE to process it from the negative. He made a good enlarged copy and Gowda was happy. I was happy to be of some small help at that stage of immense sorrow. 
I used that camera for several years taking photos of my children growing up. 
I bought some more electronics devices like radio receiver, cassette recorder etc. 
We were invited by a local family to spend Christmas night with them. It was interesting observing their dog giving a gift to their child. 
I wanted to extend my stay in the UK by an extra semester and wrote to Prof BS Ramakrishna and he said no to my request. So I decided to return after the completion of one year at Manchester.  
By mid December, we started planning to return to India.  I bought a huge box to transport my belongings to Bangalore by ship and Kumar transported it in his car. I bought a big suitcase to carry my dresses back home. Since my wife was pregnant, we bought several baby related items like a baby stroller, feeding bottles, warmer etc. 
I decided to send my wife to India at the earliest and so I booked a ticket for my wife by air India.  I took my wife to London by the night sleeper train - my first experience of traveling on a sleeper train in England. It was a private compartment. We got a wakeup call and morning tea service. I took her to Heathrow airport . My wife returned to India- Chennai - during early jan1975.  I returned to Manchester by night bus. My father picked her at Madras airport and she went to Chengalpet to her parents place.
 I returned in February middle. There was some difficulty in booking my ticket. The office said they would book via Delhi, but I said that I preferred Bombay as the transshipment point. I came via Bombay by air India and reached Bangalore in the morning by 730am. The customs was terrible. But the wait time was less and I could get into the morning flight to Bangalore though I had booked an afternoon flight. 
Greetings 
Dks
08/10/25, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 860

On arrival at Bangalore, I took a taxi from the HAL airport and went straight to the guest room in the hostel. I had already written a letter to Mr Kuppanna, hostel superintendent, requesting guest room accommodation. My friend K Palanichamy was an Assistant warden. I met him on arrival at the hostel. 
I went by 9am to the department office and joined duty. I applied for leave and left for Madras by the afternoon Brindavan express.
I returned after two days and found that my house on 11th main was not available.  So I had to continue staying in the hostel guest room. Since it was mid semester, I didn't have any teaching assignment. 
The school of automation started a new ME program in 1973. The program was a combination of two disciplines - control systems and computers. I floated three new courses : data structures, systems programming and operating systems. I taught these courses for several years, more than a decade and more than two decades for the OS course. So I had to start teaching from August 1975 onwards and so I began preparing for these courses. I continued with lectures at PSTI and Datamatics.  
Immediately on arrival , I met Prof Dhawan one day on the road. He expressed his displeasure at the rejection of leave by Prof Ramakrishna and told me that I should have written to him. I was overwhelmed by his concern for me. 
Within a week of my arrival, many things were happening to me. Prof Joseph asked me to take my books and papers and release the two almyrahs. Fortunately the faculty rooms were ready in the school and I got a room. So I shifted all my materials to this new office and took days to organize the books and papers. 
I found two new faculty members in the school - Dr Ansari and Dr Dasarathy. Prof Sanathanan was visiting the department for a year. He was sitting in an office across my office. Prof MR Chidambara also got a position in the school. I also saw that the school had a deep divide with IGS on one side and all other professors on the opposite side. There was no harmony. Most assistant professors sided with IGS. I was neutral but friendly with Deekshatulu,  SVR and SNR. EVK was also very friendly with me and others. Still ,I had a lot of support in the EE department- from professors Joseph, Krishnan, KS Prabhu and many assistant professors. But I got the greatest support from Prof Dhawan.  
More involvement and more support was coming my way as the days progressed.
It was a very important period for Prof Dhawan. The department of space has built the first satellite ,named Aryabhatta and preparations were going on for launching it from USSR. A large number of scientists and engineers went to Baikanur to prepare the launch. Despite that busy period, Dhawan saw me and talked to me.  I had one pending task. Once I left the EE department in 1973, my connection with CBIP was cut off except for attending the research conference in July August 1973 at Madras . But I didn't write a complete report on the work done in the project due to the abrupt termination not by CBIP but by the EE department.  Many project reports from others in the  EE department were also pending . Even EE lost its interest in CBIP.  But CBIP wrote a strong letter to the director. Since I left for Manchester in 1974, I haven't written the report. So Prof Dhawan talked to me about the report. Actually I submitted all papers written with project funding from CBIP to the director. He was impressed but told me to prepare a report and close the case. He was annoyed by the CBIP letter. I promised to submit within a month.
So hectic work on writing the report started and kept me busy. Mr Ramaswamiah from EE office was assigned to type the report . The work was completed in two months and the report was submitted to CBIP through the director's office . I wrote to the director informing him about the completion of the report. 
Greetings
Dks
09/10/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 861
Mr HS Nagaraja observes:
Sir, I observe that God does not choose talented people, but gives talent to chosen people. I strongly feel you are one among the chosen by God. Greetings.  Have a pleasant day. With regards.Nagaraja HS

My response
I don't agree with your observation, Nagaraja. 
God does not discriminate between people, animals, plants and nature. God's consciousness is there with the entire universe. It is upto you to take it. 
Let me quote from Kantara brahmakalasha. The concept of the well being of everything is God's wish. 
Gottilla Shivane Bhakti Daariyoo
O Lord Shiva, I do not know the path of devotion.
Gottiruvudondhe Daivavaariyoo
I only know one thing – the grace of God.
Sarve Janahitam Praanam Sthaapitaa
For the well-being of all people, life energy is invoked.
Untagaasuthalee Parashiva ShaktiyaO Supreme Shiva, your energy is established here.
Deha Shuddhiranena Bhuyat
May this make my body pure.
Loka Anugrahave Daivaanugrahavoo
The blessings of the world are indeed blessings from the Divine.
Pranaswaroopaa Tejomayavoo
You are the embodiment of life and filled with divine light.
Punyasanchayave Parama Sukhavoo
The accumulation of virtue leads to supreme bliss.
Yatra Shraddhacha Bhaktim
Where there is faith and devotion,
Tatra Labhate Jayantham Daiva Chittam
There, the victorious divine presence is attained
The problem of diffidence, dependence and unevenness is due to the total misunderstanding of our capabilities and the urge to create forward movements and tackle challenges and not dependent on God. That  is a fact shown by many that we don't understand our mind and underutilize our intelligence. We don't know
 how much intelligence we have,
 how to use it and sharpen our minds,
 how to control our minds, 
how to live purposely,
how to introspect and review our decisions and actions,
 how not to be afraid of challenges but treat them as opportunities
 and how to handle unknowns and come out of our comfort zone. 
Let me start with self appraisal , a very important step for everyone. Its purposes are
Know oneself, good and bad, capabilities, diffidence, fear and emotions, 
Know one's minds, how they work, how to rework them, redirect them, control them, guide them - deep contemplation and review
Know how to improve your emotions, decisions, actions. 
Know how to increase your mind power and use it effectively. 
Then you see the benevolence of God. Kantara and Kantara chapter1 justify our beliefs and actions. It shows that Gods elevate us to a higher level of consciousness, higher purpose in life. 
I can write more on this but I want to stop here.
Greetings 
Dks
10/10/25, 5:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 862

The year 1975 became important for me . It led me into another major research area and opened my social consciousness and enlarged my vision. I was looking at engineering from a purely technical view and had interests in nature and social and cultural behaviours not  as a hobby ,but a serious learning activity . This was neither part of my formal learning in the school nor was taught to me by a learned person. It is a very broad canvas of societies , their behaviours, history, geography, nature , religious concepts, spirituality, human behaviours,  country's growth and development , technology impacts etc. It not only enhanced my knowledge but also provided me a great window to observe and learn . It improved my contemplation skills and intuitive thinking. I consider this approach important. I saw my grandson following this approach to sharpen his mind , schools didn't help him. This complimentary learning is more important than formal learning. Formal learning emphasizes a structure , logic to learn thereby restricting our thinking. But this informal learning improves our vision , maturity, intuition and decision making skills. 
It starts with the first practice - create a deep attention span. Some households put their children on many tasks - cutting vegetables, cooking, cleaning, fetching water , market visits and purchases, handling money, doing prayers and pujas , chanting , writing , listening to Ramayana and conversations . This is missing now. Children are rushed to school in the morning. They have no time to listen to people or nature. They are hurried and miss the attention skills. We need to get back on this fundamental mental activity. I am not against school education but compliment it with world education. School education gives us skills, logic, communications, mathematical knowledge and scientific approaches. 
I used to tell my students to spend an hour or two in the library reading books or journals and increase the time of reading and concentrating on what was read. 
The next step is contemplation.  Think on what you saw or listened to or read. Abstract the learnings. This is another great habit to develop.  After listening to a talk, or reading a chapter or observing an event, pause and think and try to list out the main points. This improves our interest, concentration and analysis skills.
The most important aid to learning is reading a lot of books and contemplating on them. That made me what I am today. 
Let me look at my journey through reading. It is a long and big journey and I can't tell the big story - only some bits. 
Let us look at the journey in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
11/10/25, 4:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 863
As I said i had great opportunities to listen initially and learn through books and lectures later. This book based learning continued throughout my life. Initially during the first ten years , I read more of religious literature, fiction dealing with freedom movement, village life, city life, social life, values, politics, history, geography,biography,leadership, mass movements, poverty, development, industrialization, philosophy etc - a very wide range of learning. It enriched me.
Initially I read Kalki's four-volume novel titled alaiosai - noise of waves. While its main theme was the struggle for independence and common people's role in freeing India from the slavery of the British, it depicted in detail village life- poverty, longing for food, no cash flow, people playing cards, post office, mail brought by a runner from the nearby town etc. Life despite scarcity was simple and satisfactory. Then it shifted to life in Bombay ,a great contrast it depicted. There were enough details in the descriptions. While its depiction of village life was similar to the village life I lived as a child, it opened my mind to freedom movement and struggles, attacks by solders on common people and created a big empathy in me for the millions of common freedom fighters. I understood the importance of economic muscle in salt satyagraha. I learnt a lot more about the freedom struggles from this novel than from the school text books. Gandhi, Nehru and Rajaji wrote books and articles on the independence movement and they provided a basis for my understanding of our country in the early 20th century. 
I read many books on the lives of many leaders and that created a deep impression in me. 
As I said earlier, I learnt a lot about railways, Bombay city, life there, etc from alaiosai. Most fiction I read centered around the lower middle class , their ordinary life , their surroundings , their societal interactions and life struggles. I also learnt about nature, plants ,animals etc from some books. 
Later I read books by many English authors and that gave me pictures of London , and life in general in England.  Many newspaper articles gave good descriptions of current life and politics. 
The novels gave me extensive education in many areas. They improved my visualization capability. I got a great in depth understanding of human relationships, interactions and behaviours by reading many fiction books. Contemporary politics, economics and development were very well described in newspapers and magazines so that we got a good front seat views of what is happening in the country. I realised that every situation can be viewed in different ways ,interpreted in different ways and mostly there is no unique solution to real life problems. You should mix and balance multiple solutions . 
So books are great companions to us. 
Greetings
Dks
13/10/25, 5:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 864
So from childhood times till now, i showed a lot of interest in the following:
How do people live in different parts of India and the world?
How do people behave in many easy and difficult situations?
How do people behave under stress and emotional conditions?
How do people grow up?
What kind of purposes do people have in their life? Why do most live a mundane life without purpose? 
How are countries governed?
How do we absorb new technologies?- Arthur Hailey's books - airport and overload. 
So this was an alternative, enriching knowledge. It didn't have formal approaches. 
We looked at Mr Nagarajas query on god. God is not one dimensional. There is one Brahman which is pure enlightenment , which is aroopi . But Brahman has many manifestations. 
Sankara talked about your personal god.Ramanuja talked about Saranagathi.
Krishna says in Gita that he appears again and again.  
"Whenever there is a decline in righteousness and an increase in unrighteousness, O Arjuna, at that time I manifest Myself on earth. "GITA 4.7
To protect the righteous, to annihilate the wicked, and to reestablish the principles of dharma I appear on this earth, age after age. Gita 4.8
That is another view. 
Greetings
Dks
14/10/25, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 865
Vinod Vyasulu
Any comments on this?https://theconversation.com/what-is-ai-slop-a-technologist-explains-this-new-and-largely-unwelcome-form-of-online-content-256554
My response
AI slop is low-quality media made with generative artificial intelligence. It is characterized by an inherent lack of effort and is currently being generated at an overwhelming volume.Coined in the 2020s, the term has a pejorative connotation similar to spam.
As early large language models (LLMs) and image diffusion models accelerated the creation of high-volume but low-quality text and images, discussion commenced among journalists and on social platforms for the appropriate term for the influx of material. Terms proposed included "AI garbage", "AI pollution", and "AI-generated dross".Early uses of the term "slop" as a descriptor for low-grade AI material apparently came in reaction to the release of AI image generators in 2022. Everyone is told they can become AI expeet in 10days. So they are picking easy fakes. 
AI slop is a deceiving audio or video expected to create a chaotic situation in a stable state or creating disturbances.
AI slop is a simpler one but it can creste serious problems.  It is ongoing from the days of photoshop. Actually we can divert the attention of people with photos like the child hugging a puppy. I have a feeling fake news played a role in many countries including may be Nepal . 
We need to setup a fake detector and alert system. With our mobile apps reaching billions we need to be proactive. We can't be complacent. Alertness is a constant reminder to all of us. 
But AI slop is manageable through education and alertness. What is tougher is the capability of AI to manipulate bank accounts leading to illegal money transfers. Similarly, AI can create nuclear explosions by errors. Well AI will improve the quality of products and buildings,but it can do mischief. This was predicted by Minsky in 1959 itself. Minsky is one of the four founders of AI.
We need to create a manual override function in many cases. AI has to be out of bounds for all process automation, banking transactions. We still need a strong digital presence in many sectors.
Life will become more stressful as AIs ill effects come to the fore. Already we are seeing the unemployment problem. 
Let us be clear that routine jobs will vanish, new jobs will be generated. We need to become transformative people, thinking and innovating most of the time. 
Individuals will be entrepreneurs in their life. That is most of us will be supported by AI agents - hundreds of them, not different from a mobile app driven life now but one has to look more sharply because agents are going to become complex. 
The deep question that I contemplate is how many people can lead a life without AI influence. Can we live without AI influence either directly or indirectly? The answer seems to be no. Indirect impacts affects all
We see digital capitalism in operation in India in full swing. Financial inclusion and UPI took banks to houses. So digital capitalism helped the poor a lot. 
The future will see another form of capitalism and it will take longer to settle down. It will see more Trumps everywhere. It will not be Man mohan Singh or Biden era but Modi and Trump era of actions. It will affect all deeper. AI capitalism will affect the world severely. Life is never dull. Are we going back to the hunter gatherer era?
Greetings
Dks
15/10/25, 5:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 866
Mr B Sambamurthy refers to the weak internet in remote areas and ekyc difficulties based on the following report. 
NASHIK/PUNE: A half-hour trek uphill, a line of women waiting in the midday heat for an OTP that rarely arrives. Their eyes fixed on a phone tied to a tree - praying for a single bar of signal.Tired of too many ads?
Digital welfare dream meets patchy network reality in the tribal heartland of Maharashtra's as hundreds of are trying to complete the state-mandated to keep receiving their monthly Ladki Bahin Yojana payout.
In Kharde Khurd village of Dhadgaon taluk, women walk nearly 30 minutes uphill to find a patch of signal.
More than 500 beneficiaries from the Bhamane group gram Panchayat and Kharde Khurd are forced to wait in the sun, hoping the phone - secured on a tree - will connect to a network, often from across the border in Gujarat or Madhya Pradesh. Success rate: below 5%.
He asks
"Can't this problem solved better?"
My response
Yes ,definitely. Indian geography has a good amount of internet shadow regions even for mobile towers. So this situation happens.
Todays times of India edit looks for a easyway out- typical Indian Jugaad mentality . That is shying away from a problem, not solving it. The problem is not a rocket science one. 
So there are many solutions. 
1. Mobile vsat carrier 
2. Simple rf receiver 
3. Signal amplifiers at both ends. 
IIT Bombay did some experiments. Google used experiments with balloons. 
There is a need to get form filling done offline before uploading. Streaming is faster. Also increase the timeout.
Banks should get involved in this and should not say it is not my problem. 
The problem is not restricted to ekyc. How will we implement distance learning for children , learning through youtube and learning centres ? How do people access government services ? Do we ignore them .
Cost is not the primary concern. We spent lakhs of crores for huge airports, 8lane highways and city roads and metros  but can't provide this critical infrastructure to the poor . 
The government should look at delivery issues before deciding on a program. It is imperative that RF towers are erected at critical shadow regions and connected to the main cell towers. We can't leave it to BSNL. Other operators should get into this. 
We should go for satellite phones facility. 
When ISRO could experiment with satellite based education system targetting remote villages in late 1970s , we have capabilities and should put it to use. When governments distributes lakhs of crores as freebies, they should take responsibility to build the infrastructure to take it to the last mile like Jandhan program.
Hope a solution comesout.
Greetings
Dks
16/10/25, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 867
Mr Venkatesh ,KSCST has queries on AI.
"Dear Sir,Your response effectively addresses the complexities of AI slop and its implications for the society. Engaging in discussions about these topics is crucial as we navigate the future of technology in a discussion panel or a special talk.What do you think about the potential for regulation in AI-generated content? Does our Country has any regulation in this area.How do we regulate as we are afraid of some digital theft in banking sector, Sensex, digital weaponry and other important so called secured areas?Could there be a balance between innovation and safeguarding quality?Thank you for your continued Postings."
My response
We can't trust AI at this stage of development.  
My first assertion 
AI is a boon. It will immense benefits for medicine, health, governance, safety, education, agriculture, public utilities, etc. It can lead to much better governance, law and order, public safety, grievance redressal etc. Health and agriculture will jump several quanta for the poor.
But there are two caveats.
1. AI will need us to rewrite all our rules - is it possible. We need to reimagine, reeducate , rebuild our knowledge base ,our libraries, governments etc. We are seeing that the middle management is dead.
2.AI works today with billions of parameters, large amount of data, lots of computing units consuming gigawatts of power. Any savings in essential requirements will destroy our society, the poor and weak will be affected the most ; the corrupt and powerful will benefit most. 
Solution
Prevent AI from  overriding safety, security, fairness, justice, privacy, stability concerns of people .
So your question is timely.
Your question concerns regulations. 
My assertion 2
We can't run an AI-driven online system fully automated. AI will be used to provide a set of solutions and their probabilities. User decides which one solution is appropriate for the occasion. We need to build a context sensitive decision process. So automation should go through a verification process initially.
Just as we have a defined procedure for development software and production unit , we need to build distinct development versions separate from running versions for AI systems also for the next decade , definitely for critical applications. 
My assertion 3
Create a formal AI development model and dev ops procedures urgently.
My assertion 4
Strengthen the laws. 
Government regulations on generated AI are mandatory. All AI generated images should be labeled explicitly. We need to discriminate generated from original images. All data should identify the source. It should be an offense if not mentioned, as is being done for election publicity posters. It is necessary now. 
Most importantly, the governments role is to protect the weak against attacks. Our cyber laws are not strong, but initially , we need to bring in a strong public nuisance act against misuse of AI on personal images and data. Privacy is again pretty important. 
We need a strong criminal procedure to handle manipulation of data by AI. Since AI has an owner - declare ownership of every AI unit- , the owner should be made responsible for the ill effects. Such actions will not be welcomed. Most developers will hate it. But developers have no right to create a tool to attack others and destroy the privacy of the weak. But today, most developers arent aware of the impacts of their AI agent. Today, laws are mild and need corrections. There has to be an authority to brand a AI unit as substandard . We need standards similar to those existing for packaged food items -FSSAI.
All organizations handling data should build secure vaults to handle data. They should not be given permission for direct access to data . Access should be through a secure procedure. Even such stringent measures do not avoid frauds now. SQL injections are common. 
We need standard development and operating procedures for AI. We have good procedures for software, but weak ones for data now. We need to build maturity indices and models . That is not an easy process. Even today telecom has an involved set of protocols for operations and such rigour is missing in software . This is a good area for research . 
There is a lot of work for the government to reorient their governance strategies. 
The question is - are we hastening AI developments to reap some low hanging fruits? AI can give us a lot of advantages if used maturely. Otherwise ,we will reach the state posed by Max Tegmark in his book Life 3.0. Yuval Harari has also cautioned us in his book - Nexus A brief history of information networks. There are hundreds of books analysing the problems posed by AI. Most developers are unaware of them. They don't know they are creating demons. 
Miles to go for mature AI. 
Greetings
Dks
17/10/25, 6:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 868
Prof Karunakara raises an important aspect about god.
"Dear Sir,Are we giving all our responsibilities to God? Are we running away from our effort to correct ourselves and build a better society. Is it always God need to come and correct our society? I keep thinking on these. I look for your insightThanks and regards"
My response
Wonderful comments and concerns.
I will restrict myself to Hinduism. 
There is only one concept of god in Hinduism - Brahman - all pervading, all aware, permanent reality spreading bliss , consciousness and energy to all. He is nirguna , aroopi , and undefinable. Brahman does not support anything except indirectly. Brahadaranyaka upanishad uses Neti - not this, not this - to explain Brahman. Quantum entanglement - relationship between distant particles is possible because of this principle. Consciousness spreads throughout the universe through waves. Brahman is beyond our understanding. 
Our life's ultimate goal is the knowledge of this consciousness - moksha.
Upanishads established the primacy of this concept as the core  founding base of Sanatana dharma. It was found that Brahman was not understood by us and so we needed a perceivable god for worship. Vedic rituals are elaborate and can not be done everyday by everyone.  Later, it went through elaborate expansions to build a great structure for common people to understand god. 
All other gods are manifestations of Brahman in many forms - saguna . We talk of 33crore devas. The forms chosen give us a way to worship. Even here Shiva is worshiped in a symbolic form - Linga. You can invoke a god anywhere , perform prayers and allows him or her to go away to his place. 
According to Rig Veda - Nasadiya sarga - Brahman created the universe - an infinite space - with all entities and the life giving panchabhutas and allowed the entities to take care of themselves. 
So your point is well taken, Karunakara. God does not take responsibility for running our affairs. This huge multiverse was built to run autonomously and expand itself in many ways.
Let us look at a second view. Rig Veda talks of devas . It shows its gratitude to earth , nature, water, sun, wind , storms, mountains, animals, plants, trees etc. Its prayers request for a prosperous , healthy life, for order, harmony ,stability , for gifts to be bestowed on the performer. The main prayers are to show our gratitude to nature ,its bounties and its forces. 
So we see a change here. We are able to see many manifestations of gods and we pray to seek favors from them. 
The understanding of God changed with the next stage - ithihasic and puranic ages. 
New god forms evolved with many functions. We talk of Vishnu ,the protector, Brahma ,the creator and Shiva ,the constructive destructor. Devi worship also came up. Gods were seen as establishing order by removing demonic forces. 
Ramayana, Mahabharatha, Garuda Purana, Bhagavatam, Skanda Purana , Vishnu Purana, Shiva Purana and many more were developed. We got a rich tapestry of life, society, gods, prayers and worship, festivals ,avatars, life in other worlds etc. There are rich tapestries built around each god. We remember them every year through festivals and pilgrimages. 
Finally , each one chooses a god and prays to get solace and peace. That is important. This belief in a local god protecting us,our family , animals, crops is widely prevalent in every village in India . We live on faith in our god as a part of our family.
We tell our problems to our god . It is a process of contemplation and thinking . Many times a solution appears to us and we are happy. A child goes to its parent with its problems. Adults go to god, pray to him , talk to him like his parent and finds solace . We dont want god to help us ,but show a path . That is our intimate relationship with our personal god. 
Look at Panjurli , the god in Kantara. This worship appeared first in Chomana dudi by Shivarama karanth where a lowest caste member ,Choma believes in Panjurli. Kantara shows Panjurli protecting their land , resources, poor people from exploitation. It means " good survives over evil".
Greetings
Dks
18/10/25, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 869


Arvind comments
"The question of God's existence is a matter of debate, involving faith, reason, and personal experience, but many people consider it a matter of faith because the existence of God is not universally provable or disprovable.  Many religious traditions believe that the existence of God is understood through faith and spiritual experiences, rather than empirical proof. Some philosophical stances, like fideism, hold that God's existence is beyond human reason and can only be known through faith. Scientific inquiry, while unable to prove or disprove God, is also a factor in the debate, with some scientists finding evidence for intelligent design and others looking for naturalistic explanations."
My response
Proof is itself relative. 
Can people prove
 what is inside a black hole?
Do you know Tackions exist? 
How do break light barrier? 
What is a wave - what are its constituents?
How does quantum entanglement happen?
How do we get signals from thousands of light years away in space?
So even science hypothesizes and slowly finds answers and proof. 
Perception of consciousness is good evidence for god, but won't be accepted by these people. Let us ask - where do we get this abundant energy in the universe? 
My answer 
I believe in god , you ,the opposer , are not a nonbeliever,but a  believer  in nongod. So it is upto you to prove that god doesn't exist. 
Let us all live with our beliefs but live in harmony. Why should a believer in god prove the existence of god to a believer in nongod. Not necessary. Just ignore that. I liked Rishab shetty's comments on faith. 
There is a big group of truthers who doubt everything. They say there is a conspiracy against every occurrence on earth. They said that 9/11 demolition of WTC wasn't due to the aircraft crashing into WTC ,but planned , controlled explosion by some other forces. DMK believes in a conspiracy theory that Brahmins are responsible for all ill effects of sanatana dharma. 
There is a book by McRaney titled 
"How minds change? The science belief, opinion and persuasion." It says " given all the facts, we find people come to different conclusions. Why ? Because we are biased, we process data according to our beliefs and come up with conclusions. 
This was revealed in some concerns about AI. We will be dominated by the American way of life, American culture and we will lose our culture and even our religious thinking. Meta already makes statements about Hinduism which are not factual. 
Today's world is a biased world. We shouldn't listen to these statements as they don't reflect India and Hinduism . 
Greetings
Dks
19/10/25, 5:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 870
Aravind's response
"Thank you Sir for your views. The DMK example is nice, but the book by McRaney is superb. Agree that meta with its spread of social media is misrepresenting sanatana dharma"
Vinod vyasulu comments on Hinduism 
"DKS, you say that you will confirm your response to Hinduism. In this, Brahman is the base of sanatana dharma. Is sanatana dharma the only tradition/interpretation of our philosophical/ religious inheritance? There are others. To name just a few I have heard of, we have the Arya samaj tradition from northwest India. We have the Brahmo Samaj from the East. In the South, we have the Basavanna tradition of lingayats. There is Sikhism. All of these are indigenous. Do they all, with their differences, come under the religious label of 'Hinduism'? Or, as many claim, they are different although they have sprung from the same root?"

My response
Vinod , the question is political , not religious or spiritual. Unfortunately , minority means a special status in india and so everyone wants to jump into the minority bandwagon. 
Let me define Hinduism
1.it is not a unitary religion dependent on one god. It is not a religion with one rule book. 
2.  It is beyond religion. It combines many life styles, many kinds of activities, many purposes in life and many cultures. It is a holistic operating system for survival as humans. 
3.It provides multiple approaches or paths  to a person to follow. All paths lead to god. 
4. It is a dharma - harmonious, orderly, truthful , non violent, sharing ways of living. Live and let others to live is a broad guideline followed by Hindus. 
5. It allows hundreds of practices. While vedas are the source books, people developed and constructed many doctrines and paths. Sastras were reconstructed and recreated over thousands of years by thousands of scholars maintaining continuity. Sastras dealt with many topics like cosmic life, nature, astronomy, logic, transcendence, human systems, language, mathematics, thermodynamics, metallurgy etc. Particularly this was evident in the past four to five centuries. Many social changes came up and stayed within the religion. Veera shaivism was very ancient form. It preexisted lingayats. 
6. Hinduism is interpreted by many. Sankara provides several axioms and redefines the principles of Hinduism. Many felt that he accepted Buddhist principles.
7. Hinduism accepts all - believers in vedic practices, puranic practices, samskaras, temple worship, kula devata and grama devata worship , spirituality, asceticism, materialism, atheism, etc. So it is a broad umbrella of practices. 
8. It is an inclusive religion. It does not reject anyone. 
9. While Hinduism did not reject dalits ,but treated them badly, there are no dalits in jainism or early buddhism. Only Dr Ambedkar created a new Buddhist religion. Both cameout of power struggles of communities - an anti brahmin movement. While Buddhism favoured kshatriyas , Jainism moved towards Vaisyas. Emphasis was different in both. Buddhism did not practice non violence . Meat was allowed. Jainism followed Ahimsa very strictly. Buddhism followed scholastic pursuits like Hindu sastras. They participated in Tarka. Many brahmins moved to Buddhism. Both used similar worship practices like Hindus. 
10. Hinduism survived all onslaughts, maintained and preserved its vast collection of sastras ,rituals and samskaras - a remarkable feat. This was not any institutional work. It was the untiring work of thousands of gurus over three millenia. It is an individual religion, not institutional. 
11. Hinduism built resilience in people. People survived and survive due to this resilience property.
Take your answer.
Happy diwali greetings
Dks
19/10/25, 5:47 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Hello
Diwali or deepavali is a festival of joy for indians. 
Wish everyone a happy celebration in this week of diwali. Let us keep our concern for nature and environment as top priority during the celebration. It is a festival of giving , sharing our joys . 
Greetings
Dks
20/10/25, 4:16 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 871
Let me complete my discussions on Hinduism
12. Hinduism is a highly diffused ,multipolar religion with no central authority like a pope. Only god may have an authority ,that too rejected by some Hindus. Rig veda says that a ruler is governed by a sabha and samithi . So a king is not an absolute authority, not a guru even. 
13. There is no mechanism in Hinduism to declare someone as Hindu and excommunicate someone out of the religion. That authority exists with churches , mullahs and deobandhis etc. They are powerful. 
14. The only power centre in Hinduism are the gurus , but there are thousands and they propound no unified single theory acceptable to all. Hinduism is an ocean of many theories and practices coexisting together with reasonable harmony. 
15. Hinduism was not easy to understand. So many scholars and acharyas reinterpreted and simplified the core principles so that the religion reaches not just scholars ,but also common people. Prominent acharyas known to the history are Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhva . Their disciples carried their messages forward. Later we had Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, swami Vivekananda ,  and many others appeared on the scene to build clarity to the abstract principles. That continued for a long time. We saw Ramana Maharshi in recent times, mother at Pondicherry , swami Sivananda at Rishikesh and his sishya swami chinmayananda , . Thousands of such preachers exist now. There were a large number of poets like Purandara , Kanakadasa , Thyagaraja, Sant Tukaram, Samart Ramadas ,  Kabirdas , Tulsidasa , Valmiki etc who carried popular easy to understand principles and practices across the country. Many gurus and teachers also propagated many concepts to people. Five basic components were made widely popular and acceptable across the country and were extensively practiced.They are music, astrology, yoga , Ayurveda , worship methods and bhakti. 
16. While there was no central authority, rulers were supposed to follow dharma - just rule for all. They get their advice from brahmin gurus. Initially ,Kshatriyas were not happy with this. Some revolted against this. That led to Buddhism. Later Vaisyas were not happy with the practices and some were unhappy with brahmin influence , some with animal sacrifices and they led to Jainism. 
17. Central authority was questioned in the vedic period itself. The first rebel is Yajnavalkya.  He developed Sukhla yajur veda. 
18. Hinduism had some warts. So reformers appeared periodically. Two famous ones are Basvanna and Narayana guru . They transformed society. Then we had Raja Rammohan Roy who developed brahmo samaj and Swami Dayananda saraswsthi ,Arya samaj.
19. While there is no common definition of a Hindu , there is an implicit understanding of what is not Hindu- non obeying of societal order. 
So in answer to the question by Vinod, I should say that
Hinduism considers all these as their children and allows them to coexist. They are not excommunicated by any authority. 
Greetings
Dks
21/10/25, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 872
Let me return to IISc and the year 1975 . I had returned from England and was settling into IISc. I was staying in the hostel as my house was not free.
A Number of things were happening in that year. My daughter was born in march 75 at Chengalpet . I was present in the hospital when she was born. I saw her and then departed to Bangalore. 
I got a good opportunity to integrate sociology with engineering and create new views . I consider that to be very fruitful for me in my research. Let me explain my interest in sociological and cultural aspects of the world. This habit deserves a detailed look and analysis. 
I believed early in life that knowledge can come from any and every  source - a Rig Vedic dictum. 
In 1975, ASTRA was set up and AKN was the convener. He left for sabbatical to UNEP and Prof Krishnaprasad was looking after ASTRA . I had earlier worked with him for the time table committee.  So he asked me to become part of ASTRA and get involved with the renewable energy activities. That started my in-depth involvement in the area of energy. 
I moved from looking at energy from the electricity point of view and developed a holistic view of energy involving many forms like thermal, chemical etc. I taught a course on non conventional energy in 1968 - 1969 and was familiar with nuclear energy. I focused on bio energy from wastes - biomass and bio gas. 
One of the weaknesses of engineering thinking and education is the total lack of a holistic view. Engineering is viewed as a set of parts and the connections are missed. The connections are many fold - mechanical, electrical, at the first level and flows - water, air, heat etc at the second level. But at a higher level engineering is dependent on energy flows and uses. Later i looked at a still higher level of information flows. These flows were seen in isolation. Even power and energy units were different - like watts and units in electrical engineering, horsepower and hp hours in mechanical and calories and BTU in thermal. There were efforts to create a common base like tons of coal equivalent or oil equivalent. Bio energy was ignored.
Let me complete my comments on engineering. There is another connection - that is data control and command flows. 
That pushed me into a new  direction of thinking and work - integrated energy models and optimization. I started to look at efficiency at an integrated level - a second law approach. These aspects along with environmental concerns became my next research focus for the next 30 years along with computer science areas. I moved away from power systems completely. 
KSCST was just coming up and Mr Sethu Rao joined it. He was sitting in the IPC department. 
We conducted the first annual seminar of ASTRA and KSCST annual meeting. I presented my work on community biogas plant . Prof Dhawan attended the meeting. 
As I decided before, my teaching shifted to computer courses only. I taught a course in the EE department also. 
Greetings
Dks
21/10/25, 7:39 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Wishing you and your family, a very Happy Deepavali! May this festival bring you excellent health, abundant wealth, lasting prosperity, strong and loving relationships, and success in all your endeavors. May Goddess Lakshmi's blessings fill your home with light and happiness, guiding you toward a bright and fulfilling future.. श्रीवर्चस्वमायुष्यमारोग्यमाविधात् पवमानं महीयते |
धान्यं धनं पशुं बहुपुत्रलाभं शतसंवत्सरं दीर्घमायुः ||
22/10/25, 4:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 873

Aravind has another query 
"Hindu religious practices include devotion (bhakti), worship (puja), and meditation (dhyana). Diwali rituals include cleaning and decorating homes with lights and rangoli (colored powder or petal designs), lighting diyas (oil lamps), and performing Lakshmi Puja to honor the goddess of wealth and prosperity.Rituals are a manifestation of faith, and their evolution is a product of religious and cultural shifts over time. While some ancient rituals have been questioned and adapted, faith drives the continued performance and adaptation of these practices to ensure devotion and reinforce religious beliefs; The cultural context provides the framework for their modification and evolution. Performing rituals is a way to express gratitude to natural elements and deities, showing faith and building religious sentiments. Individual faith allows Hindus to choose how they practice rituals, such as going to temples or not, which highlights that the connection to the divine is not solely reliant on rituals.  Are rituals connected to religion or culture?"

My response 
Identification ,classification and separation of entities as religion, culture, sociology , cosmology, ethics and humanism, sadacharam - good conduct, spirituality, etc happened much later , definitely after the rig vedic times.
Rig Veda provided a complete picture of life - spiritual, religious, ritual, farming, knowledge generation and absorption, family related activities, conduct, ethics, nature, natural forces ,society related activities , governance etc. It provides a holistic picture of life as it should be lived. 
We segregated activities as vaidehic, loukikam- loka sampathith , daivic, Vyavaharic,  etc dealing with divine activities, household activities, societal activities etc later. These definitions came from the language side. 
The term religion was not applied to sanatana dharma till 19th century. Sanatana dharma core principles are enunciated in upanishads. 
What is dharma ? It defines many ways of life to be lived. Before we start living , the emphasis of dharma was understanding of our neighbourhood, our country, our ways of living , our conduct , etc . That is called sociology. Accept the fact that there are many ways to live . 
We need energy and food for survival. We get that from nature. That deals with the environment and profession.
We want to understand beyond what we already know. We want to know the cosmos and our relationships to the various elements of the cosmos.That is normally known as religion. But now part of it is science - astrophysics. 
We want to live in harmony and happy. That leads to humanism, good conduct, sadachar and values - ethics. Practices emerge to improve living. 
We live according to a large number of socially accepted practices and that may be called culture. Our social culture is submerged and combined with religious culture. We had extensive social and religious practices. For example, Deepavali is a social function, but it has religious connotations also. We offer prayers before the start of any public function. We light a lamp also. Those were part of our smriti. Smriti also provides laws for good governance. 
Culture is not a single entity. There are hundreds of cultures- work, food, farming, eating, worship, festival, pilgrimage, marriage etc. 
Culture-  the customary beliefs, social forms, and material traits of a racial, religious, or social group. also : the characteristic features of everyday existence (such as diversions or a way of life) shared by people in a place or time.There are seven elements of culture: social organization, customs and traditions, language, arts and literature, government, religion, and economic systems. These elements form the way of life for an entire society, including how people dress, the music they listen to, and how people greet each other.
So religion and culture are not distinct entities. They are highly connected. Don't see each part, but look at the connections. 
Life implies an eternal search for knowledge leading to better and happier living.
Hope this answers your query,Aravind.
Greetings
Dks
23/10/25, 5:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 874
Let me go back to 1975 and IISc. 
My personal task was to shift to a house so that I could bring my wife and daughter to Bangalore. I was staying in the hostel and Lakshminarayan was not vacating my 11th main rented house as his house construction was getting delayed. I didn't want to rent another house. I liked the 11th main house. 
The other reason why I didn't want to rent was the fact of unaffordable rentals.This was due to the fact that Bangalore started growing faster with a lot of small scale industries coming up in large numbers - thousands. Electronics was growing fast and most electronics activities happened in Bangalore. Peenya became the home of thousands of industries. It started growing before the electronics city at the other south eastern end came up in 1978.  A large number of research labs came up. They needed precision instruments, precision manufacturing and modern systems. This led to a number of people migrating to Bangalore and the demand for housing shot up leading to a very high rates in rentals. While both Rajajinagar and Jayanagar extensions were growing fast with thousands of houses at affordable prices, both were not easily reachable from IISc - our bus system was poor-. Also water availability in Jayanagar was poor till the arrival of Cauvery supply. I couldn't afford a house on the new rates of rent in malleswaram.
One day as I was talking to JVisvanathan, Prof Krishnan's research student, he said that Prof Krishnan's house in palace orchards was vacant as he was in the US on a sabbatical visit. My problem got solved. I took the key from him and moved into the house. Then I wrote to my wife to come back to Bangalore. We lived for three months in that house. I call that place an upper class slum as I was disturbed in the night by the blaring sound of automobile horns of returning house members in the neighborhood. The costs of most items were higher.
The economy was poor and costs of most items were shooting up. Some were not available. I had to stock pile baby food as it was in short supply. Open market prices of essentials like rice, sugar, pulses etc were high. We didn't have a ration card at that time. Coming from the UK with its affordable food prices, I needed time to get adjusted.   We lived there for about three months and then I got my 11th main house back. 
The economic and political situation in India was deteriorating faster. Indira Gandhi found governance tougher. So she imposed emergency and arrested most political leaders. Even congress leaders were afraid . Fear percolated everywhere.  Actually ,on the day emergency was declared, I visited my friend R Ramalingam , IPS . We both attended Hindi classes taught by my uncle during the fifties. I was in high school and he was in college. Our friendship continued till he retired from service around 2000. He was in a tense position having arrested many senior opposition leaders like Vajpayee, Advani, SN Mishra etc. I realized the seriousness of the situation. 
Greetings
Dks
24/10/25, 5:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 875
While the whole country was in uproar over the emergency governance without any law to protect common people. Some in IISc supported the government , most opposed it. There was fear everywhere. Police power was visible. But life continued as usual, but with difficulties.
Since I went to Manchester on sabbatical, my salary was paid by the institute. That meant I had a good amount saved. Mr Thimme Gowda introduced me to Mr Byrappaji MLA , a friend of Gowda. He told me that Byrappaji wanted to dispose of his site in the upcoming area of west of chord road extension. It was a corner site. Byrappaji was an honest politician and needed money. So he agreed to sell the site to me. He obtained permission from the CM to sell the site. 
Despite a difficult money situation, I decided to invest in the land. I was a little short of the required amount for the site - the agreed amount was 24000 rupees and I had only 22000. He agreed to collect the remaining balance after a year. Really a very nice person. As I narrated earlier, a tragedy struck and Mr Gowda lost his son. So there was a delay. At the beginning of the next year, the sale deed was registered. 
It was a good deed done and I was happy about the whole incident. 
As I said, this period was a redefining period for me in my research work. I moved into operating systems as my main research area. I focused on two aspects  - one was performance issues of operating systems and the other was optimal scheduling policies. 
I also looked at what the gaps in research at that time were. They are
1. Very little of holistic modeling. Most models were approximate. With a very high precise computing available , modeling can become more detailed . People still were solving small problems and prefered analytical solutions. Looking at bigger landscape in problems was not known. 
2. Computer usage was ignored by most engineers. For instance , communications systems researchers were studying only components and point to point connections. Mr Satchev, chief engineer ,ITI said that power engineers are using network approaches extensively and communications engineers should look at it and solve communications networks problems. Similarly , matrix methods in designing multi storeyed structures in civil engineering was just developing. There was no analysis of irrigation networks and urban water supply systems. I intiated research in these areas. 
3. Optimization techniques were not used to handle large problems. Performance analysis needed to go further. Most solution techniques were approximate and constrained. We needed to go forward in these areas. 
4. Computer science is evolving faster with applications in many domains. I should not restrict to engineering but look at other areas like social sciences ,economics etc.
5. Most research focused on known areas and focused inwards. They didn't look outward applying techniques from other disciplines. Holistic thinking cutting across borders was non existent. 
This knowledge was very useful in the selection of research areas and work. I constantly updated this list.
Greetings
Dks
25/10/25, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 876
The question is
How did I find the gaps?
Normally researchers looked at papers and identify gaps in that paper which can be attacked and improvements found. 
I didn't do that. I went beyond , looked at current contents and analyzed the list of titles. That revealed that most papers are improvements. We didn't see large changes. But occasionally one title talks of a new topic. The number of such new topics was very small. Then I looked at the abstracts to know what type of work was done. Based on these observations ,I realized the overall gaps that I discussed in the last post. That was a great guiding principle for me. 
Next I analyzed the types of research as incremental, small changes, new approaches, new interpretations etc. Based on these , I decided on my future research directions.-
1. Don't stick to an area and keep working on small improvements. Move to a new area. This is not an easy decision. It involves a lot of reading, contemplating, thinking , and developing new approaches. This leads me to another question - how do you know what new areas are emerging? This is a tough question. I will answer it a bit later.
2. One simple answer was to stay in an evolving area. My friends in EE department - about seven or eight of them - in the sixties saw that control systems was an evolving area. Nonlinear control , multi variable control and optimal control were good areas for research. Then they moved to stochastic control. These meant that you applied good mathematical approaches to solve control problems thereby providing opportunities for research. But I was the odd person at that time. I was working on power systems and there were a lot more topics that I could work on. I had opportunities for the next ten years in the power systems area. I found that most US and UK universities moved away from power systems research. But I saw that computers were seen in the horizon and realized that the opportunities for research will be much higher. But it is still in the infancy . I chose the tough option of moving into computer science area for my research.
 I tried to see what was evolving and move there. This principle helped me. I moved into online transaction  processing as the next area with a focus on distributed databases and concurrency control in addition to performance . Then I got deeper into databases and moved into data mining. 
3. Don't work on delta improvements. Focus on modeling, architecture, integration and applications. 
4. Be unorthodox. Don't look at journals for your research. Look beyond . Look for trends. Look at the market. Companies can provide a scope for research.
These helped me in developing a canvas for research and broadened my knowledge and thinking. It shifted me out of a narrow focus. 
Greetings
Dks
26/10/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 877
Now let me address the question?
How do you know how research is done elsewhere and how new areas are emerging?
The answer is :
Don't focus on your work alone. Don't focus on your discipline alone.
Look outside- at your colleagues in the department, colleagues in other departments, colleagues in other institutions, in other disciplines, in other countries, at industries,at governments, at societies, at applications etc.
That is a serious hobby or activity one should develop and keep looking regularly at the outside world. This is an important learning process. 
Look outside means a little more - observe, identify what is happening, contemplate, understand and infer new ideas or applications. 
Most of us think that books are good sources of such information. Unfortunately that is not fully true. Most books do not provide futurist information. Look at all AI books. They write about existing techniques or impacts ,but don't say how AI will move forward in the next ten years. A few have written about futuristic scenario but pretty vague. Most writers write about the past. Discriminatory information, inferencing, conjecturing  etc are difficult to find in books.  We need to look for other sources - networking, conferences, discussions, email correspondence, attending lectures by experts , looking at youtube channels etc are more useful. 
This concept - look outside - is very useful to most people. A housewife picks better recipes ,better cooking practices from mother in law, from books like Samaiythupar ,from TV, from youtube channels etc. A manager finds better practices in another organization. 
I was lucky in that I got a lot of opportunities to look outside and learn a lot from many organizations. I kept my eyes open and talked to people and learnt what they were working on. 
I started by looking at how people and systems work in public institutions, shops, banks, libraries, schools, transport units etc during my school days. My involvement in many societal activities and my curiosity helped. 
As I had stated early, my regular habit of reading hundreds of books and contemplation broadened my world view. That was my second step in looking outside. 
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
27/10/25, 5:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 878
When I joined IISc , I got a lot of opportunities to learn - first by absorbing a broad spectrum of the culture pervading at IISc. It was a mini India. You can live in your known world of Tamils or Telugus or Bengali or Kannada or Punjabi or you try to know the culture of others and understand India. 
The academic culture encourages all students to work seriously, to read a lot ,to think , to contemplate, to solve problems, to look at challenges and new areas and to work independently. It was a great place to generate large number of concerned and thinking engineers and scientists - deep thinkers, problem solvers who accepted challenges in life. This culture nurtured a number of emerging disciplines in addition to producing thousands of talented people. 
If one looks at research areas pursued at the institute, you will find basic research and you will find nationally useful research - water resources, wind tunnel experiments, power network design, waste water treatment, solar energy, acoustic design of theatres, antennas, space technologies etc. In addition , faculty got in solving hundreds of problems faced by the country in many sectors. This led the institute to be a leader in sponsored projects and consultancy studies. 
One great thing I saw in the institute was visits by many experts both from India and abroad. The invited talks held at regular intervals by experts from India and abroad provided a big window about research happening elsewhere. I learnt about multivariate control systems, Kalman filters, digital filters,  pattern recognition, computer linguistics, Graphics, image processing, space technologies, intermediate technologies - refined sugar vs Kandsari,and many more areas. These lectures opened my eyes to what was happening in the world. I got a very broad picture of the future trends in electrical engineering and computer science. 
The fourth aspect of my learning from the outside started with my computer use at NAL, and HAL in 1966. I saw many users and knew the problems they were solving. I started helping many in programming. I had written programs for many people in IISc and outside.
 Later this got extended to TIFR. I met many scientists there. My friendship with Bukebag brought me in contact with many senior scientists in their Physics and mathematics department. Of course, I interacted with several CS faculty there. It was a great revelation.My decades of association with PSTI and engineers from many states widened my vision about electricity generation and use in India. My association with CBIP helped me in knowing how people work like automatons without thinking. That led to many encounters with senior engineers who didn't understand what a power system was. I felt sad about this ignorance. We did our best to alleviate it through our training of engineers at PSTI. Though I didn't continue my work on power, I continued disseminating my knowledge of power systems and use of computers for more than two decades. 
This kind of opportunity increased with time ,led to my visits to hundreds of institutions and enlarged my vision of the past , the gaps and the future directions.
Let me look at my big  travel with computers next .
Greetings
Dks
28/10/25, 5:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 879
I decided that I needed to know what was happening with computers from 1975 onwards. Computers had a high potential for applications. Initially till 1975, computers were mostly used for solving scientific problems in mostly R and D institutions. The IISc IBM computer was used by our students and researchers from NAL , and defense R and D labs. Similarly ,the TIFR computer was used by mostly scientific researchers. 
This situation started changing in the early part of 1970s. Karnataka government set up a computer centre in 1971. HAL moved away from aerodynamics calculations to store purchase inventory applications. Unfortunately that shift led to the death knell of the HAL computer centre by 1980. 
 IBM1401 was used for data processing and many reconditioned machines were imported during this period into India by IBM.That led to the slow use of computers for accounting and stores inventory.
 So the four decades 1975 to 2015 saw a highly innovative developments in computer science.I had a very close front seat view of computer developments all these years. I participated in these journeys. 
It wasn't just research and teaching but I got opportunities to participate in the computerization of many functions in the industries, governments, Institutions, R and D labs, utilities and later banks. I also introduced not only computer culture in a large number of institutions - many universities, RECs, engineering colleges , management institutions like IIM ,Bangalore, TAPME ,Manipal , and many industries like CMC, TCS, Jindal Steels, and many organizations like central silk board, Department of Space , Department of science and Technology, - ,but also advised them in building computer applications and culture. This culminated with mahithisindhu program and core banking in several banks. 
I introduced several new and just evolving courses in many institutions. Some of the courses are UNIX, distributed operating systems, artificial intelligence, databases, distributed transactions processing, expert systems, software engineering, systems analysis and design, federated databases, etc.
It was a very fruitful and wonderful journey. I will describe it in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
29/10/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 880
Looking outside is an important requirement not only for researchers but even for organizations, banks, finance institutions and for people employed in various professions. This is a necessity for all today in the changing and uncertain world. Unfortunately, this easy and important requirement is ignored by most people. IT industries like TCS ,Wipro ,Infosys work for other organizations and hence these industries are forced to look outside as a regular business, others go through routine activities and concentrating on internal firefighting. Most professionals and managers look inside and conduct their activities. They don't see what is happening outside. The technological changes kill their organization and their job. 
I am always puzzled why engineers think - you see this is true about our engineers in PWD and electricity and water boards- that what they learnt in their college days is enough and nothing more needed to be learnt? That is due to the looking inside approach. Most industries like ITI, HMT, Heavy engineering corporation etc died. But BEML survived with a transformative outlook. 
Fortunately, Consultants needed to look outside for survival. 
The next step in my work was to go beyond looking outside. Looking outside keeps you online with changes happening in the world. But i wanted to go beyond, and be a change agent and a transformation generator. That meant that I should be part of that change. The next 35 years saw me in that role of transforming education, transforming institutions and industries and initiating changes. 
I became lucky to form associations with many groups and committees in India to know what was happening from close quarters and participate in changes. 
I saw the first generation vacuum tube computer - TIFRAC - at TIFR. Then I saw an early second generation computer with a simple instruction set and a small delay line memory - a modified design of Alan Turing's first machine - called Ferranti Sirius at NAL. Then I used the next level second generation computer at HAL. 
Later I saw and used  a very advanced 64bit second / third generation scientific computer with punched card reader and core memory and FORTRAN compiler - CDC 3600 at TIFR  .Till then, there was no commercial computer development in India. 
The third and fourth generations of computers got developed in the first part of 1970s. This gave birth to 4 bit computers by Intel using VLSI. That year 1971 was the dawn of large and fast developments in computers and the starting of the famous conjecture by Gordon Moore - Moore's law which predicted the growth of computers . That law is true till now. The term microprocessor appeared on the scene.
Both DCM and ORG, a group set up by Vikram Sarabhai in 1961 developed digital calculators. Deepak cables also tried building a micro digital processor in Bangalore. But these didn't succeed. 
Then  I saw companies being set up, struggle and either surviving or dying. PSI was a great example at that time. Dr Ravindran , Vinay Deshponde and others set up this company at that time . They picked up quite a few of our students. It transformed and kept up with technology changes. HCL was set up in 1976. 
Greetings
Dks
30/10/25, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 881
ECIL started building mini computers by this time. They established a big computer group. ECIL diversified into many areas like instrumentation, control and automation, and computers and employed many experts. This was the first serious effort in the country to produce computers - design , develop software and manufacture computer systems. It was a complete unit usable. Initially they built a 12 bits computer. It was used in earth quake tracking in Gouribidanur and it worked for a long time. Then they built 16 bit computers and later 32 bits computers. It was a reasonable business for them. I visited the computer division in 1976.ECIL lacked marketing . They could sell these computers at high prices because of import restrictions. But low cost microprocessors were coming into the market. ECIL didn't capitalize on that. Minicomputers became tougher to sell. So the computer division wound up by 1980 or so. 
By this period, the computer society of India was set up with Prof Narasimhan as the first president, followed later by FC Kohli. 
I have attended more than 50 conferences by 1975 - some conducted by IISc and IITs discussing research work going on in the country, some by professional institutions like Institution of engineers, IETE, IEEE, and IFAC and some by specialist groups like CBIP. The conferences play a great role in our research and our learning. We can test our work based on response received in the conference, we get to know what others are working on and we get a good pulse of the country. 
CSI conducted an annual convention, a well organized program with paper sessions, keynotes and exhibitions. 
It was my first experience of CSI convention with a good mix of academics, computer manufacturers and business users. The mix was very useful learning for me. I knew what was happening in the country. There was no other way of knowing these. And I had a great networking experience. Like CBIP, I could meet the CEOs of many companies . It was simply a great opportunity to know what the different kinds of uses of computers were, how the industries were evolving etc. So I started attending the annual CSI convention regularly for more than the next two decades. I also conducted several conferences under CSI. 
More in next
Greetings
Dks
31/10/25, 5:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 882
The first CSI annual convention I attended in 1976  gave me several revelations. As I said before, we got a good picture of hardware companies. There are quite a few like Hinditran, Computronics etc who supplied imported computers. Hinditron was very successful in supplying oscilloscopes of Textronics and PDP computers like DEC10. Many others supplied computer parts. Some new companies like IBM, ICL,ECIL, DCM ,HCL etc who were manufacturing computers were present in the convention. 
Very few academic institutions like IIT Kanpur, TIFR, NAL, IIM,Ahmedabad participated . IITK allowed several students to attend the convention. That was good practice. Later ,IIT Bombay also participated in CSI conventions.  TCS was coming up then . Many companies presented their efforts to develop programs for business applications with focus being on mostly input output related and data related. Panels discussed future directions on languages. 
Later on CSI introduced one day tutorials on some latest topics and I had conducted several tutorials. 
While in the beginning, in the late seventies, academics felt superior with focus on technical content, slowly business focus became dominant. Only the Bangalore chapter dominated with academic focus till the eighties. I wasn't unhappy with the presence of a large number of senior business leaders. I understood their struggles and their efforts to accept computers. Mr Balan of ACC was one of the first to use computers. He was Prof V Krishnan's brother in law. Mr Jayant of air India was another senior person who appreciated my courses. He made a special mention about my courses.
 It gave me an opportunity to study technology absorption in India. I also saw quite a few companies jumping into application software development.This led to a big change leading to the concept of professional software and the acceptance of outsourcing. TCS was the first to move into this business. This gave them international opportunities. 
This shows how we went through a step by step process in technology absorption. Two changes were observed by me. 
One, we moved from hardware oriented activities to software activities. The Academic world didn't consider software as an important activity. They thought programming was an individual activity for solving problems, not a discipline and not a serious pursuit. They felt work on applications is inferior to technology development. While I worked on technologies, I felt applications have a great potential and there are opportunities for technology based research. But the business world realized its needs and opportunities. 
Two, activities were shifting from foreign to Indian companies. Many companies developed in house applications. I remember Tata companies, ACC, HAL getting into computerization of their accounts. This in turn gave opportunities to consulting companies, creating a whole new concept of outsourcing. An outside company like TCS not only provides their advice - that was what TCE was doing at that time- , but also take responsibility of execution and operations. It is also an end to end responsibility. Trust was established between companies wanting services and companies providing services. It was an integration process, not just a programming activity. It was a great beginning of a new services business , not understood and appreciated at that time. Many even said that we should focus on hardcore computer design and manufacturing and not on applications. I was one of the few who felt that applications were a major futuristic activity. From that time, my relationships with TCS increased with time. Till 1975 , I had a good relationship with both Tata electric companies and Tata consulting engineers on power systems work. Now that shifted to TCS. It grew and continued till 2023 - a very long and fruitful association.
Greetings
Dks
01/11/25, 4:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 883
Let us understand the Indian computer picture in the seventies. 
We can't import computers. There was a rigid import control.Only a few institutions like TIFR, IITs,IISc were allowed to import mainframe computers. Similarly a few companies like TCS imported a computer. A few cities like Calcutta and Pune set up regional computer centres. So computer was a limited resource in the country. It was a very bad situation . Though the department of electronics was set up by the Indira Gandhi government, computer development for business  was of low priority in the country. Activities related to computers were seen with suspicion - the compute will automate jobs and thousands of labour will loose jobs. So it was opposed. Railways and LIC were barred from importing computers. Even UGC was slowly waking up to the building up of computer knowledge in universities. Except JNU and BITS Pilani, no university had courses on computers - a big tragedy. We lived in that ignorant and myopic era till mid eighties. There was allround ignorance. 
Some businesses bought IBM1401. So companies with computers and programmers had advantage over others and got business easily. So business applications prospered. COBOL increased the speed of business application development in the eighties. Database systems ,ERP, internet took businesses to great heights. 
Prof RN realized that CSI is going the business way and there is a need for a serious conference on theoretical computer science. So he started another serious research focused annual conference on FSTTCS. It was run in Bangalore for many years. That was also very successful in building serious research activities in India.
Prof Karunakara raises another aspect here :
"Dear sir,Very nice to know the developments happened in early stages.India was able to grab new opportunities in software domain. What strategies were there at that time for hardware manufacturing? Why India failed(not successful)in that front? What was lacking in our vision?Thanks and regards"
My response
Hardware manufacturing started early in the seventies. As I said before ECIL produced costly mini computers. Later in the eighties, many companies came up - PSI ,HCL,Wipro,NELCO, Zenith,Eiko computers,PCL,  etc. They all struggled a lot. We got a few good designers like Ravindran and Vinay of PSI, Raman of HCL and Sridhar Mitta of Wipro . There were some others like Sun ray computers who stayed for a few years. Tatas went through decades of struggles in hardware manufacturing. They didn't succeed. Some companies died early. Some like HCL and Wipro survived till the early 2000 and then died or stopped hardware manufacture. 
Today, it is only foreign companies like HP, Dell,Acer,Lenovo who supply hardware in India. The high end Server market is dominated by IBM,HP and Sun- Oracle. It is a sad state .
What are the reasons for this sad state of hardware manufacturing.
1. The terrible and strict import control policy that persisted till 1990 didn't make hardware production easy. The cost went up. There was no technology transfer. There were delays in procurement of components. There were inverse tariffs - components taxed more than the finished parts. Keyboards, displays, printers, disk units were all imported. So costs were high. There was an anti IBM lobby in the country for a long time . Not only Congress but Janata party also opposed IBM. George Fernandez banished IBM. It was a disaster. Even Burroughs and ICL struggled in India. 
2. Technology was changing fast. Our companies couldn't afford disruptive modernization. Still ,they moved fast with both Intel and Motorola processors. They built client server architecture. They adapted to LAN. 
3. Cost was high, profit margins were low. Software services gave high profits. So Wipro and HCL moved into the profitable area .
4. Infrastructure required was almost nonexistent. There was no foundry. Getting the latest components was tough. 
5. Talent pool was low. We had just a handful of designers. Hardware design wasn't a priority area in most institutions. CAD labs didn't produce high end designers. They concentrated on low end circuits.
6. Computers were not just hardware. It has a strong software -OS, compilers ,utilities - component . That was ignored by many. Standard OSs like Unix, Linux and windows helped a lot . PSI struggled on software development. It designed its own OS. It had lots of bugs. There was no collaboration with software companies.CMC tried to help in building total systems. TCS had a hardware hands off situation. It wasn't allowed to import microprocessors in the early eighties. 
7. There was no holistic vision of integrating all. Only TCS in the beginning moved into applications. Wipro and HCL woke up very late. Wipro set up a separate company - Wipro systems - for software development. It didn't work well. 
7. There was no support from the government.
8. Networking became a separate activity with CISCO dominating the scene. Network architecting and installation became a separate activity.
Greetings
Dks
01/11/25, 7:51 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, Greetings for the Rajyotsava day!! Regarding compute infrastructure, we have been always lacking though the government pushed a lot through CDAC etc. Even today though we have a big market, we still do not have Indian companies in computers or the networking market from mobiles, laptops, desktops, to servers and data centers. In consumer electronics, LG India IPO has made their market cap more than the global LG Market cap, but our companies (except few exceptions) are still struggling. What do you think Sir is the reason for this? Why didn't CDAC succeed? Will we face the same problems when Quantum computers come? Thanks in advance!
02/11/25, 5:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   884
Mr Ramanathan shares his experience:
"In Seshasayee Paper & Boards, we tried to import process control equipment in early 80s. Argued that it is no computer simplicitor but in the form of Plant & Machinery integrated with pulp and paper production. Was to improve several process parameters and optimise cost. Spent months to push it at several stages on this rationale. Finally met respective Secretaries on the week before meeting who all appreciated the merit and offered support. In a couple of days at the meeting,  the proposal got rejected as the imported item can be used for office computing. Spending a year, we gave up on rejection !"
Mr Aravind has a comment and query:
"Sir- Did India miss the hardware manufacturing revolution in the 1980s? I recall Kohli talking about the need for this in late 1980s at the IISC., and spoke of protectionist and restrictive policies, bureaucratic hurdles and need for a vision on infrastructure."
My response 
Ramanathan - I have heard many such incidents. Prof Nag was removed as chair of electronics commission at mid night as he didn't get money on licenses. 
Aravind
Yes . Kohli was very upset. It is not Mr Kohli but many suffered by the most negative policy of Indira Gandhi and later Janata party. As I said earlier, we suffered from many sides 
1. A poor import restriction 
2. A high tariff used to harass companies by the License permit raj. You not only pay high tariffs, but pay bribes to the officers. 
3. The biggest was the total absence of hardware infrastructure - we had no foundries. Hegde and Golay set up 1965 to modernize soldering and production of printed circuit boards. Many industries came up but all died due to low business opportunities and profits. I saw bangalore growing fast in electronics in the sixties and seventies ,but the industry struggled by the eighties. It was a tragedy. ITI stayed too long with electro mechanical switches and didn't modernize. Even today, though I am happy with the foundries coming up , we still lag behind internet connectivity, speed, reliability , and we are not ahead of technology , but behind by more than 5 years.
4. The Serious problem is integration. As Ramanathan said we had thousands of industries who wanted to modernize and improve quality with automation and they didn't get permission . They all struggled. Our automobile industry is still struggling. 
5. Government ignored hardware industry, didn't build digital infrastructure. While Malaysia could produce memory chips, Thailand could produce most electronics devices, Japan could produce electronic entertainment, Taiwan produced processors and designs, China and South Korea moved mobile manufacture to very high volumes, what are we doing.Are we so inferior that we are good at tailoring and plumbing and nothing else. It is an unhappy situation. Even the present government is looking backwards, and looking at other countries for technologies. Our government, our R and D labs, our IITs, our industries all look backward and look at America. We are not futuristic. We don't even anticipate technology. 
6. Even when we know a technology evolving in other countries, we couldn't build it here in the initial stages. We need collaboration with foreign companies. When GIS was promoted by DST , I was involved in the program both at DST level and at KSCST level . We struggled to build a good GIS software despite funding. 
7. Our servile,and colonial attitude needs to change and our confidence level should go up. Can we learn from Sundar Pitchai, Satya Nadella,Shantanu ,Arvind Krishna and Arvind Srinivas?
8. Most important, we need a mindset change, a work culture transformation and a strong move towards collaboration.Atmanibharta is not just for manufacturing, but for our minds also, our thinking and innovation also. We have a poor work culture. We don't exert and go to the end. Most academics don't do research. Forget research, they don't have curiosity, don't read, don't think and don't work with passion and goals. They retire mentally at an early age.
Destroy secrecy, promote openness, transparency ,and participation. Contests like Atal innovation  help only at the first level to provide delta inputs.  They don't lead to breakthrough technologies or products.All funding are for survival and firefighting not to move up, not to build breakthrough systems. 
I feel very sad seeing these kinds of negativism in the country.
Greetings
Dks
03/11/25, 5:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 885
Dr Sanjay Chitnis continues on this discussion.
"Dear Sir, Greetings for the Rajyotsava day!! Regarding compute infrastructure, we have been always lacking though the government pushed a lot through CDAC etc. Even today though we have a big market, we still do not have Indian companies in computers or the networking market from mobiles, laptops, desktops, to servers and data centers. In consumer electronics, LG India IPO has made their market cap more than the global LG Market cap, but our companies (except few exceptions) are still struggling. What do you think Sir is the reason for this? Why didn't CDAC succeed? Will we face the same problems when Quantum computers come? Thanks in advance!"
My response 
It is a good question and should be the focus of our ministers. 
The first ,biggest problem is to get 360°views on technology. Most have a very small fraction of views. 
Second problem is to know how technology can be developed, nurtured , manufactured, adapted ,used and modified. Most miss several steps in tech life cycle.
While Ashwini Vaishnav looks at one aspect - trying to correct our semiconductor vacuum after a long time. He is pushing many to get into chip manufacture and succeeded. Tatas got into it in a big way. He also diversified chip production to many states like Gujarat, Assam and Orissa. Chip design is with Bangalore and Hyderabad. It is a good decision. But he addresses one problem. 
Mr Piyush Goyal recently remarked on deep tech and has come up with a huge startup fund. I think that his idea is good but implementation was bad. I will discuss it later. 
Let me see the different technologies first. 
Technologies can be viewed as traditional , modern, complex, integrated , engineered, consumable- user oriented. The main complaint is that we focus on user-related issues in technology and ignore technology generation / inventions. That is true. 
Every Technology has a life cycle 
1.Idea generation
2.Development of principles and science
3.Technology development
4.Tech components production
5.Tech utilization
6.Tech diffusion , consulting , integration , etc
7.Tech agile operations and maintenance 
8.Tech modifications
9. Death and generation of new tech. 
We need to understand the life cycle . It is important to see that there are no gaps in all these phases and no actor is ignored or missing.
Who are the actors in that life cycle?
1.Tech generation -R and D labs ,academic institutions. They need long term plans ,goals and commitment, scholarship, futuristic vision. They shouldn't be satisfied with trivial publications. This is not there. 
2. Development - R and D labs, universities, engineering colleges, government policies, government support, grants. Who checks what the R and D labs are doing. Most work on yesterdays problems. 
3. Manufacturing - needs large facilities. Needs great designers. We need design centres to deal with complex technologies. We need architects also. 
4.  Consumer products development and uses- start ups today. Government support is needed. Facilities for supply chain , transport, use ,testing etc are to be built. 
5. Technology absorption - services , consultancy and integration companies. This is doing well.
6. Technology awareness - engineering colleges and polytechnics. They today unfortunately deal with existing technologies and not on current technologies and don't bother about emerging technologies. The entire degree program on AI is a poor showcase. They don't use real life big data.
7. Technology use - consumers, companies, industries, services units etc. 
Unfortunately most actors are not doing their jobs or doing it in part or in silos without integration. Our main weakness is here . The actors are unfortunately focused towards consumer technology usage. Diversity and depth are poor. That is another problem. As they say, we are spreading our resources very thin so depth is not easy to achieve. 
Remember the first essential condition for success 
All these tech segments should be developed ,all the above actors should be involved. 
First reason for our failure - the above holistic ecosystem and actors are absent . We are not solving this holistically but piecemeal. We have only two approaches-
1.Set up a new institution like CDAC with government funding to handle tech development only ,ignoring all other aspects.
2. Fund projects , startups. 
That leaves huge gaps. Industry wants low hanging fruits and concentrates on tech adaption and services, ignoring tech development. 
But there are a few successes in our country. Let us discuss them in the next post. 
Greetings
Dks
03/11/25, 8:14 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, thanks for the detailed apt answer. It clarifies.
04/11/25, 5:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 886
We got great visionaries - Dr Homi Bhabha and S Dhawan - who built two organizations - atomic energy and space. Both had a holistic 360°approach in building the two institutions. They wanted freedom from interference from government, transparency, talent and leadership development, international exposure, participative systems, lower level empowerment ,promotional opportunities, good planning , reviews and systematic execution , great resilience. They achieved their requirements. Both created a great working ambiance. They were doing serious work in an integrated manner. They had futuristic plans, no stagnancy. Both organizations are vibrant and moving forward , handle tough problems like GSLV with cryogenic fuels and breeder reactors . Both did good integration of many technologies. 
To some extent, we can add Missiles development by Abdul Kalam to this list.Brahmos has shown its success. Similarly ,the multidimensional air shield displayed during the Sindoor operations is another example of a great design. 
That considerations of a complete life cycle displayed by ISRO/ Atomic energy departments  is missing in CDAC. It was a technology development centre,  but we don't know the users and their requirements. We don't have production units, user facilitation units, user support centres. I say that CDAC did a remarkable job . It built param super computer successfully. But the utility was the problem. 
CDAC is not an industry . It was a development centre and did its job. We didn't have production , application and distribution units to take param forward. I feel it was a success . But the model of propagation of technology was wrong. We need to address the model, not the R and D labs. 
Let us then try to understand the model next. 
What is a technology ? It can be a device, or machine or mechanism as understood by most. Technology is not standalone. It applies scientific principles to produce a useful entity.
Todays technologies are complex. The path from technology to use is not easy. It involves many steps like problem discovery,tech selections, architecture, integration,design,solution methods,building, testing and operations. We don't look at technology but at the connections. 
One thing we should understand and appreciate is the fact that application engineering ,solutions engineering and operations are not trivial. They play a big role in the countries' development and growth.
 Technology can be three fold 
1. Devices and systems for doing a task. They are oriented towards customers - people ,industries or organizations. 
2.Tools and techniques
3.solution provider .
It took a century to develop technologies to use electricity. So after electricity and communications came in, technology is no more an accidental activity. It is developed after a lot of work, some concepts like alternating current and many artifacts like generators, transformers etc before it becomes usable.
More in the next
Greetings
Dks
05/11/25, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 887
Technology can be classified as 
1. It can be called a fundamental one. Examples are Electronics, atomic energy, computers , AI , quantum computing etc. It is a two stage development.  We develop the basic principles first. That is the science component. This may take a few years of research. Then comes the realization stage where we use the principles and build a visible entity . For example ,electronics started with thermionic emissions. Then we invented vacuum tubes. Then came transmission and receiving equipment. That is simpler and easier and done faster. But consider digital computer. While the principles went through decades , the realization of computer was a complex task starting in the late 1930s by Turing to 1950s with ENIAC and EDVAC and it took the next twenty years  to come up with working commercial computers by IBM, Burroughs and Rand. Biotechnology took longer time for science. AI took close to 60 years to get to a working level of principles, but realization was faster. We have been talking about quantum science for 70 plus years. It evolved slowly. Nobody looked at it beyond subatomic physics levels. Its first principle that world is not analog but digital led us to computers. Its next set of principles are leading us to realize quantum computers. Work went on for more than two decades to get some working realizations.
So one thing is clear - technology evolves over a period of time and not instantly. You are not taken by surprise.
This kind of fundamental technology is further divided into
1.Older technologies like electrical , transport etc.
2.Modern technologies like mobile phones , refrigerators etc
3.High technologies which are complex and combine many technologies . Examples are Computers ,IT.
4.Emerging technology refers to technologies coming up like AI ,nano tech, materials, renewable energy , quantum computers etc.
5.Consumer oriented technologies like consumer products and services like ecommerce, fintech etc. 
6.Engineering or manufacturing technologies deal with technologies used in manufacturing and utilities like control, instrumentation, automation, etc. 
7.Energy technologies are technologies used in energy production, distribution and use like solar, biogas, biomass, etc.
This is where the question of Sanjay comes. Where are we in India in this phase? 
While research happens in several places in many emerging areas like biotech, AI, to a reasonable level, research in nano technology , quantum technologies is at a low level. But our sad state is a very weak R and D on materials . It is the development of materials that is spurring most basic tech developments and we are missing it. The second problem is that we miss deep research in AI,quantum ,nano technologies. I call deep research as one which goes through the science ,tech and engineering stages and produce a tangible entity or product. We have disintegrated and disconnected research in our country. The third problem is poor science training. Interest in science is vanishing amongst students. The fourth and a crucial problem is the mindset and work culture of most researchers and academics. Both need major surgeries. 
Most faculty in engineering colleges,universities and even some NITs have a lot of diffidence ,a deficit of confidence, an excuse mindset and a non responsibility approach. They don't even own their courses, have minimal interest in research, don't know about product development, don't read, don't work hard and feel unhappy. The toxic work ambiance is an important reason. But they built the work ambiance partly. 
This aspect of fundamental basis for technology is weak in our country and no institution is looking at it, planning for a detailed list of deliverables , finding funds, building teams, putting them to work and conducting reviews. Government funding alone is not enough here. Peoples involvement, passion ,ownership and participation is needed. A good leader like Bhabha could do it. Why did the government not setup a department for AI or quantum learning from the experience of atomic energy and space departments?
Let us see what we can do in AI that will make our work fundamental  next.
Greetings
Dks
06/11/25, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 888
Let us see how to improve our work in AI.
AI work can be classified as
1.Looking for better AI- more humanistic, general AI- this is fundamental work.
2.Improving existing models
3.Building better models
4.Rectifying biases, detecting fakes
5.Reducing compute time
6.Producing faster hardware
7.Applying AI - millions of apps can be built. India is here mostly. Lots of startups are working on AI apps.
8.Building AI engineering, AI software,AI architecture and AI operations - big IT is moving here.
9. Integration with existing systems , modifications, reengineering .
10.Data engineering,supervisory AI and AI automation.
11.Using AI- adoption and operations
Today I am happy that most institutions specialise in AI. That is great. I see even 15 year old students building AI agents.  But most interest and most activities centre around the existing AI technologies and tools and not inventing new technologies. Why do we focus on chatgpt or gemini or copilot ? Also we are focusing on applications . That is good. 
But can we look for breakthroughs in health, traffic management, security,medicine, garbage removal ,governance etc? Most AI workers don't use real life data. That is a big mistake.
One  good technologist in India says that we should not build LLMs. That is erroneous. Fortunately another good technologist ,Sridhar Vembu, says that we should build Indian LLMs. We need to build an LLM to follow Indian grammar rules and Indian materials and web sites to reduce biases. 
But I am surprised that we are not looking forward to new developments in AI. AI is still in the first stage and we need to build higher levels of explanations, analysis, discrimination, cognition, and intelligence.decision making using multiple methods, unbiased learning etc. 
2. Child technology - many foundational technologies give birth to many child technologies. Biotech gave birth to biomedical technologies. The internet gave birth to fin tech. Communications gave birth to optical fibres , mobile computing and satellite communications. Computers gave birth to data engineering, web engineering, transactions processing, data mining etc. 
2. At the fundamental stage you can't absorb technology. So Technology development takes us to the next stage - tools, artifacts, addons and incremental components and concepts. Look at computers. After computers were produced we got many addons coming up - input devices, printers, displays, tapes, disks, etc and many concepts like software engineering,compilers,operating systems, ether net, LAN, WAN, internet, web, cloud etc. 
Developmental institutions in addition to academic units act in this phase. 
3. We get a solution engineering phase. We transition from simple technology to complex engineering. This phase focuses on giving a great and full shape to a usable entity - a product or process. This phase needs great designers and architects. We lack both.
4. Then comes the application phase. It is here that we have a lot of jobs and most companies concentrate on developing applications or adopting and integrating technologies. The country has enough expertise here. It is not easy work. 
Governments are doing their best. Then where is the problem?
Let us see in next post.
Greetings
Dks
07/11/25, 4:25 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 889
Let us see the positives for tech development in the country.
1. We have a strong and large set of engineers for the basic activities in high tech areas. Our thousands of years nurtured and practiced learning culture is not dead. It is still there simmering in our society, producing brilliant people.
2. We have a strong digital public infrastructure. This facilitates learning from anywhere ,any source and at any time. Class rooms are secondary now.
3. Our experience for the past 50 plus years - both at KSCST and FAER- shows one common feature of India - our students are keen to work on interdisciplinary and modern topics. They are prepared to learn from outside sources to conduct experiments and build devices. They are aware of the modern technology developments. They have curiosity ,and energy. They are not loaded with the 50 years of the many outdated beliefs carried by their teachers.  This shows we have a bright future if we nurture this curiosity and energy. Many institutions support the students . The number of students working on AI related projects is very high.I have enough evidence on this. 
4.Research awareness is increasing. Many institutions are entering QS ranking now. The NIRF is also pushing institutions. But NIRF needs research focus ,interdisciplinary focus, design focus. 
5. Startups culture is spreading across the country and reaching even tier2 cities. Many startups come up with technology use and absorption. Ecommerce is reaching every place and every item. This is a great positive. Without educational institutional support in most cases, our youngsters are venturing into startups. It is a very strong and thriving culture. Government funding is good.
6. Government liberalized our import and technology policies. Government focuses on improving both research and technology cultures in the country through many schemes and large amounts of funding and credit. Government plays a dominant role in pushing the country forward in tech development through a series of sustained activities. Atal innovation scheme is a good one. Many ministers have sound views on tech development. It is a great positive that government is aware and actively pursuing a set of futuristic policies to lead in technology development. 
Sanjay Chitnis quotes:
"Incidentally just 3 days back Mr. Ashwin Vaishnav had called for a meeting of all stakeholders related to deeptech in Bangalore. The government seems to be very serious about this. The government is also funding many venture capitalists now to in turn give patient capital to deeptech."
7. Some institutions take up big projects. IIT madras is building hyper loop experiments. Many colleges build satellites. A few quantum computers are built by a few institutions.
8. AI is the most impactful discipline today. We can ignore it at the risk of disaster. But most ordinary people are aware of AI. They use mobile phones easily.Most engineering students study and apply AI. Most IT industries have moved into AI and working on AI in the past 20 years. It shows that we are through the first step. It is a big step forward.
9. At last we are going with good speed to build the semiconductor infrastructure in India. It is a big move.
10. We have many great models to emulate . IITs are good examples a great educational and research institutions. NITs are not following them. CDOT and CDAC are determined initiatives to move towards deep tech of that day. Most importantly the departments of atomic energy and Space and also to some extent DRDO proved our capabilities and successes. Why not follow them?. 
Arun Tanksali comments on CDAC:
"There was one area that CDAC did work on which has been very important. This was the creation of ISCII which later on was the foundation for Indic languages in Unicode. Prior to ISCII (and, more practically,  Windows supporting Unicode with Indic languages) there were a plethora of incompatible formats which were in play. You needed to know which font/tool was used to display content back. ISCII, which matured in the mid 1990s, was quite transformational. I was part of a govt committee in the early 2000s to standardize Indic support in mobile phones and it took many years of pushing to get full support from the phone manufacturers in the feature phone era."
11. Government funding is remarkable. Are we,the recipients, using the funds properly?
Greetings
Dks
08/11/25, 5:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 890
Then what are the negatives to tech development? 
Negatives mostly centre around two major entities - people and organizations. 
Let us look at people first.
1.  The biggest hurdle is our mindset. It is colonial, submissive, negative and with a careless attitude- chalta hai. We are loaded with lots of beliefs,and most of them are no longer valid. These traits make us a less mentally strong human. 
2.  We just move along, we have aspirations definitely.but we have low will power. We are normally risk averse, failure averse people. We are also timid and diffident people.
3. Some times, we hear that India is a traders country. We broke that myth with strong IT services and we have shown to the world that we are a strong digital nation. Unfortunately, we are happy being the followers , not the developers and depend on foreign imports. Now we find that attitude is putting us in danger and we are waking up to the realities. 
4. We lack killer instinct. 
"killer instinct" is a strong desire to win or succeed, often achieved through an aggressive, ruthless, and determined approach that prioritizes dominance and goal attainment over other considerations. It involves a powerful, tenacious will to succeed and can be seen in both sports and business as a determination to defeat opponents and crush obstacles to achieve a goal at any cost. 
That means we lack passion. We lose interest and don't put in sustained efforts to takeup a challenging job and complete it successfully despite failures. Most us don't own our job's responsibilities. 
I was interviewed by Mr Sapru from Indian Express in the late eighties. The question posed to me was what ails Indians ? My answer was we lack the killer instinct. That seems to be true even now. 
5. The first requirement for a strong tech development is curious thinking habit. This habit is effectively destroyed by our educational system. Managements think discipline is essential in an educational institution.
So managements control faculty - faculty shouldn't think . I visited a famous engineering college for AICTE inspection. I asked a question to the principal. He was replying . The chairman asked him to shut up . I had to take strong exceptions to that behaviour. Tamilnadu institutions overdo discipline to the level of slavery.
Faculty in turn tells the students to keep quiet. So thinking gets killed at a young age. We want mental slaves. Most organizational leaders love slaves - yes people. Even reading habits are coming down. This is a serious problem.
6. While our Indian youth is all set and ready to move into modern areas, others put brakes on that and consequently our tech movements. Who are they?
 There are two sets of people - influencers and powerful authorities. They are having 50 years old beliefs. They have not moved with time. Most senior faculty stick to old tech ideas and prevent others moving forward. It is the seniors who build and control the ambiance and don't allow changes and discourage others taking up challenges.
7. In addition to curious thinking, both teachers ,and taught as well as engineers need a cognition - to understand technology, engineering, design,multi dimensional problem solving of real life large problems and most importantly the cycle of transformations.  
Prashant Joshi gives an interpretation:
"An “ecosystem” like thinking is required is what I believe."
My response
"Holistic thinking on all dimensions are needed."
Joshi again
"Yes. I generally consult on such areas under the "Ecosystem" term and call most systems as "Systems of Systems". It is getting larger and interdependent. It will need great focus on getting things done. As you mention in your article above, a lot needs to be thought first; and I notice a lot of eager to get into action for an idea. So things need to move from idea->action to idea->thinking/debating/decision/evaluation->action."
Conceptual clarity is important. 
A wonderful explanation by MK Srikant on the need for out of the box alternative thinking :
"Interesting! Thanks for the detailed analysis, it made good reading. One of my observations ( possibly re- phrasing part of your text): right from the education system, we are tuned to adopt what is handed down to us, rather than think afresh to create totally new ideas. That leaves us forever playing catch-up with the leaders."
My response 
I agree. We need imaginative, constraint free out of the box thinking. It makes a person very successful in the tasks he or she takes up.Einstein gives importance to imagination. Newton says we sit on top of the learnings of many to look for ideas. Miss Marple -Agatha christie- looks at the behaviours of known people to solve murders.
“Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal; bad poets deface what they take, and good poets make it into something better, or at least something different. The good poet welds his theft into a whole of feeling which is unique, utterly different from that from which it was torn.”—T. S. Eliot
"All creative work builds on what came before. Nothing is completely original."
Austin Kleon
More in the next
Greetings
Dks
09/11/25, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 891
Let me continue with the negatives.
8. We have a big leadership crisis. That is a major lacuna in our system which for millennia respected and built a good and thriving leaderships. The traditional village Panchayat system developed good leaders.Today our system generates only status quoist leaders - just keep moving and performing fire fighting.
I have seen hundreds of leaders - university vice chancellors, directors of IITs and NITs, Principals of engineering colleges,CEOs of companies and CMD/EDs of banks, secretaries in the government- and interacted with them. Most, I think,are not competent to be leaders. I am very unhappy with the quality of leadership. Most leaders don't meet the requirements of a leader. 
What are some qualities you expect in leaders?
1.Look forward, be a futuristic thinker.Build visions for the next 50 years. See the Modi's vision of viksit Bharat. I have seen several visionary leaders - some names are Bhabha, Sarabhai, Dhawan, Abdul Kalam, GVK Rao- chief secretary of karnataka-.
2. Break the status quo ,static attitude. They understand the thriving ,living and dynamically changing organism that is their organization. Many leaders have led their organization to a higher level. I can't forget Mr H V Narayana Rao who rose to be chairman of KEB and CEA. He created a participative working style and changed CEA.I remember Mr Nambiar who built KELTRON. He constantly thought about improving and changing his company. Another person is Mr Sambamurthy, who introduced financial inclusion for the first time in the country. He also took IDRBT to great heights. Dr Chakravarthy , CMD Indian bank and later PNB and later deputy governor, RBI was a clear thinker and knew the future directions. He was fearless. 
3. Focus on building organizational synergy, strength and strategies. Again, we may find many leaders who were great human analysts, who understand their organization and customers.
4. Change agents - initiate changes to take the institution to a higher level. I recall both Prof Prahlada Rao and Prof Holla changing MSRIT and RVCE. Both institutions grew better over the years. Prof Nityanandan brought research culture in TCE ,Madurai, converting a pure teaching institution into a teaching and research institution.
5. Trend setters. Mr FC Kohli is a good example of creating a new area and building a large organization.
6. Builders who take the organization through new evolutions ,transformations, uncertainties and failures . I see both Mr Ramadorai and Mr Chandra of TCS as great examples of this category. They took TCS through many innovations and transformations.
7. Leadership builders- Tata trust is a good example here. Hindustan lever built a culture of leadership generation. Leadership generation is important in business and politics. ABVP has been generating leaders. Prof CNR Rao built science and scientists across the country.  IITs generate leaders who are fearless, who think independently and work for building  greater institutions. PV Indiresan,director,IIT,Madras, is a good example of a fearless leader. Most IIT , CSIR labs,DRDO directors lacked leadership qualities.
 Let me summarise my views based on my observations and discussions. 
1. Most followed existing practices. Family oriented businesses dominate India. Most obeyed their bosses. Most followed rules
2. Most didn't understand their institutional goals ,functions , the environment. This is a sad but real factor in India. I can even say that most were just time keepers.
3.Most leaders follow a safe route - follow rules, don't displease the authority, create a submissive work culture, stabilise the activities etc. They don't want challenges , don't even want changes leave alone transformations. They are static and totally inward looking, myopic people without goals, vision, and future proofing. 
4. Most leaders follow some established outcome based factors like production, growth, profit, number of students passing the exams or getting placements etc. They don't think. 
5. Most leaders don't have goals , or 360° views or futurist visions . This is a huge drawback.
6. Most are inward looking. They ignored the outside . They don't see changes happening outside. They don't plan or strategise or go forward. They think their organization is a static entity . Most engineering college seniors and principals are rooted in the 20th century thinking. They don't know what changes are happening in this 21st century. Nobody changes an organizational structure. Mr Kohli, Prof Dhawan, Mr GVK Rao made great and highly transformative changes in their organizations. They set the trends and were agile. We don't have agile leaders. 
7. Transformative leadership - people who create a new culture. Mr Nandan Nilekani is a good example. He built aadhaar ,a unique ID for all Indians. It transformed the country. Similarly, UPI is another great transformative system. Another example where I was involved is TEQIP,a world bank funded program. It transformed our engineering education. It brought in strong research and computer culture. Mr RN Mathur is the leader responsible for this.
8.Managements are myopic and don't have transformative mind. One big failure was Infosys - not understanding the AI vision of its then CEO, Vishal Sikka. They missed the bus. There were many known and good leaders in Infosys who torpedoed Sikka's vision. 
9.Actually, none of our companies had a bold plan for either AI or big data or quantum computing or nano technologies. Only the government came up with many bold plans like swatcha Bharat and smart cities and large plans for renewable energy transformations. Modi is a tall leader based on his initiatives like Nehru in those days.
10. Management education focused on business. But Prof NS Ramaswamy saw the importance of people, society, traditions and tried to build a transformative IIM at Bangalore. He assembled a lot of eminent members of faculty.Unfortunately, he couldn't carry his colleagues with him. He worked tirelessly on his ideas of bullock carts, bullocks throughout his life. He was a great friend of mine. 
But the biggest problem is that we are not building education systems which can integrate theory and practice and inculcate leadership culture in a large number of young people who then can achieve breakthroughs in science, technology ,politics and governance and face AI happily. That is the need of the hour.
Mr HS Nagaraja concludes
"What we need to take home from this post is " we should stop developing Slaves, but stop not Creating Leaders" Sir, Hope my comprehension is correct.Thanks, with regards. Nagaraja HS"
My correction
We should convert slaves to thinking humans and start creating visionary leaders.
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
10/11/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 892
Mr Srinivasan PNB
"Good morning sir.  The above is a treatise on ingredients of leadership qualities.  A comprehensive one. Namaste 🙏"
Thanks,Srinivasan
Let me return to our discussion on negatives.
I said the negatives depend on two entities. We saw the negatives related to people . Let us look at the negatives with organizations. 
Most of our organizations -be it a governmental one or research labs or educational or bank or industrial or services one - have been mostly built during the British time by the British. So they followed British policies ,traditions and methods. Unfortunately , we still follow those British colonial policies and methods. We didn't change .We didn't understand the problems due to these outdated organizational principles and practices.
1. If we want to move forward , then we need to know about 21st century principles and not 19th century principles. The world has changed a lot. Let me list a few aspects that need to be addressed.
2. 21st century organizations are decentralised . That is no central control. Even IT is decentralised . Most computer and software purchases have been left to individuals. BYOD is acceptable. People adopted technologies like internet, whatsapp, social networks ,mobile apps faster than organizations. Responsibility rests with people. Management has little role in control.
3.21st century is innovation centric. We want 1000 ideas to bloom.Routine work is dead. Managements should focus on innovations. Managements should understand changes and the impacts of technologies like quantum and AI. Existing generic management principles need a total revamp.
4. An organization is a lively and dynamic one changing with time. Most of our people stick to old theories and principles. This frustrates younger people. It is a serious problem. One reason for a large number of startups coming up in the country is this. Startups don't follow the outdated rules, they have freedom to work, they don't need approvals. There is no hierarchy, no central approvals, no delays, no budget constraints. Startups are agile, and change rules every day. 
5.our organizations focus on rules and not activities. They ignore people. But 21st century organizations give primacy to people. We have to move there. 
6.21st century is a digital organization based on AI,data, mobile, online ,web based, and not paper and files based, multi layer approval based, not slow in decision making. Automation dominates now.
7. We have a toxic organization today, not a happy working place. Everyone has many pressures- work pressure, supply chain problems, electricity problems, customer problems, regulatory problems, delivery problems, manager"s abuses etc. Most people lead a stressful life.
Here is a comment by   Sonamkumar 
"Good morning, Professor.I have an observation:"Authorities and donors are more interested in evidence of efficiency, than in children's well-being and learning."This was reported in a news article too, and it's very true - we face this emergency of compliance at the 'junior' level to the very core, that most of our efforts need to be channelised to documentation.How can we get our of this and concentrate more on the teaching-learning practice?"
Let me look at my encounters with this toxicity. 
I had full freedom at IISc to teach and evaluate and select my research areas. Nobody compelled me to work. But when I want some purchases done or attend conferences or spend my project money, the administration, purchase and finance come in the way with a ton of hurdles, delaying my activities. I missed many conferences because of these delays. Our admin is notorious for losing requests. 
Initially we had an admin to take care of student admissions and scholarships and a small accounts unit. Departments were responsible for all activities. Institute appointed a deputy registrar in 1965, then a finance officer, then a purchase officer and so on. All these officers destroyed us. Centralised admin is a bane of India. 
Let me look at my worst encounter. I went to Trivandrum to conduct a PhD oral for a student at Kerala university. The supervisor left the university. No supervisor was appointed. I conducted the open viva. None from the department attended the viva. Then I was told that i had to visit the finance department of the university to submit my travel bill. I went there with the candidate's husband. The officer wanted me to be identified by someone from the university. That was tough ,since the supervisor had left the university and none from the university attended the viva. See my situation. I had many such encounters in many universities. Most had really archaic ,impractical rules which effectively destroyed work and made people lazy. "Not working" became a credit. Responsibility and ownership were ignored. 
This shows we ignored the primary function and moved to a secondary function or a non function. 
This toxicity kills innovation, thinking and motivation. 
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
11/11/25, 4:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 893
Let me continue with organizational problems.
6. Most organizational practices in India are based on mistrust. So we build a hierarchical structure- worker, supervisor, manager, general manager,director,MD etc. But in todays environment and with younger population, this won't work. People should be treated with empathy, respect and freedom. All these three are missing. Fear is ruling in most colleges and universities. Many Indians working outside India don't want to comeback even though there are great opportunities. They hate our toxic workplace. Government created opportunities but organizations - private,public or government - have not gone through reforms. Some government organizations like Space, Atomic energy, IITs succeeded in providing motivation , freedom and respect to their people. But others including many CSIR and DRDO labs used a lot of centralized bureaucracy and didn't give freedom or fast approvals to progress in research. I was puzzled with that level of babudom in other places and then I encountered it at IISc. IISc fortunately had escape mechanisms to solve admin problems. We changed rules, created new structures with power with committees of faculty, bypassed admin sometimes etc. 
7. The existing structure doesn't give freedom to people to experiment and innovate. Budgets are not allocated in a flexible manner. So this kills innovation and creativity. This means most faculty look for easier and small problems that don't involve large experimentation, many equipment and large budgets. Purchase of equipment is a torture in most institutions. You go through hundreds of approvals and get finance. We could modernize many institutions through TEQIP funding. Breakthroughs won't come through such a fixed, rigid, top heavy organizational structure. Even our industries follow archaic practices and organizational structures suited for the 20th century. They think that innovation is someone else's responsibility, not theirs. So they grow in one direction. AI will give a deathblow to all Indian industries unless they change. Industries don't know what should be the role of many managers. Automation of office, finance, HR, supply chain have made managers redundant. Our management education is blissfully following old practices, unaware of this constant tsunami.
8. All organizations think that building and nurturing new and emerging areas in science and technology is the governments responsibility and not theirs. We need to kill this excuse mindset of organizations to prosper intellectually. 
9. The first change - remove fear, trust people, give them freedom to work. This means in the case of industries, government and banks - remove supervisors and automate supervision, remove managers.Create a strategy group. Focus on innovation. Form teams and give them freedom and budget to work.  Empower groups with small number of people. Don't just focus on profits but on customer satisfaction.
10. The second change is the need to build a transformative agenda to meet the uncertainties and changes. Here we need to work together with government , universities and industries. That synergy is now available in a small measure. Make that - create a unified planning group- a priority. 
11. Go for a holistic planning and implementation methodology. The synergy and holistic planning starts with establishing linkages between academic institutions and industries with government support. I think that this happened first in Bangalore - a collaboration between IISc, HAL, Defence and later NAL,ADE,GTRE . I have seen this collaboration functioning effectively. Then we had collaborations between IISc, CEA and electricity boards, CPRI and power industries . Much later the IT wave came up with collaborations on many sides with government support, with talent pool generation , government support and the flourishing of small scale industries without the toxic culture. We had similar collaborations in areas like atomic energy - Bhabha was in IISc initially -, space - Sarabhai was in IISc and Dhawan was the builder- and later defense. So I saw synergy solving problems. We need to take it a much higher scale and break the silos approach adopted now. 
What do I mean by holistic development?
It is not wholesale revamp with systemic changes . That will lead to resistance.
It is not development across the board - a general set of rules governing all stakeholders.
It is a connected sequence of developments removing gaps and problems for each area and group. We need to build
1.synergy and connectivity or alliance- government -institutions- industries
2.visionary leadership
3. Large projects coordinated by the various entities
4. Large participation and team work.
5. Lab to market links.
Greetings
Dks
12/11/25, 6:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 894
Let me conclude the discussions. 
1. Do we need tech development? Even Prof Raghuram Rajan was skeptical. There are many who feel we are doing fine. But the power circuit tripping that happened several years ago and the recent Delhi airport GPS spoofing as well as many incidents highlighted by CERTin show that we will lose our security and independence if we don't get into serious tech development.
2. The government realised this before academics and industrialists and is planning to put in massive finances towards AI, quantum , and other emerging areas. But a concerted effort on data generation, protection, privacy and use is needed. 
3. I am sure organizations and industries will wake up to reduce toxic working atmosphere and create a clean,open, participative, thinking and fearless atmosphere. Our strong startups culture and our great support to the growth of GCCs promises this happening.  But what about private colleges, universities and research labs? Who will clean them? Who will change them? Government should open up and support building a large number of Coursera kind of models from school level onwards. Otherwise that gap will exist. Many of our educational institutions running as a business and for profit will die.
4. But the biggest problem is the faculty in our institutions. How do you change their attitude from excuses and escapism?How do we make them to go positive, to be curious, to think,to read, to innovate, to build large projects? How do we make them take responsibility to be up to date on technology? How do we motivate them? I have no answers. Maybe the millennials will change these negatives. I still see several blaming the environment and not putting their efforts. 
5. But the future looks good. The threat of AI will wake up our faculty and school teachers. It will hive a huge jolt to the 18th century vintage colonial universities.
Quantum will change our existing analog concepts and analog thinking and analog problem solving and all areas will move to quantum sciences like the mid 20th century shifted engineering to mathematical problem solving and late 20th century shifted engineering to computer solutions. Survival depends upon updating ones knowledge, relearning the new engineering and rethinking about jobs.
The alpha generation will destroy the other generations in the next 10 years,I guess. Even Z gen have to change their attitude. 
The impacts of AI will be severe. Most industries will dismantle their C suite and shed their managers. Everyone will be part of the industry and business. A new culture will replace the existing toxic culture.
We have a proactive government. We will move forward. The march will be led by Z gen and alpha gen.So the situation is not bad or dismal but seniors need to wake up to this new reality.
Greetings
Dks
13/11/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 895
Let me return to my IISc timeline of 1975 76 again.
A quick review of my stay at IISc:
The period 1965 to 1973
It is a period of initialization into research culture and also a perood of good research work in a modern area- computer based problem solving for power systems . It gave me a lot of exposures:
Work in several emerging areas like programming, nonlinear equations, nonlinear optimization, computational problems of convergence and errors, data collection,etc.
The period also gave me conference exposure and networking with most of the countries' leading power engineers. I also enlarged my knowledge scope by teaching many courses at IISc , programming at datamatics , power systems at PSTI. That broadbased me . That reduced my fear unknowns. That increased my appetite for learning. It defined me as a person who wants to learn, explore, help others and organizations, teach and look at new problems. These improved my confidence level and my competency to high levels. I want to call this period a period of gaining maturity and academic respectability.

The period of years from 1975 was definitely an active period for me - a period of broadening my areas and vision and I call this a consolidation period. The institute started expanding in the seventies. The institute got into a major ,long lasting reform - setting up new departments and centres. We got CTS , centre for theoretical studies,a unique experiment initiated by George Sudharshan. It was set up by Prof Dhawan in 1972.  It brought in physicists , Prof Sharatchandra, genetics expert and two biologists, Prof Madhav Gadgil and Sulochana Gadgil. Dhawan also brought in Prof GN Ramachandran to start the new molecular biophysics unit and Prof CNR Rao to set up the solid state chemistry department and later the materials research lab. It was also a period of many senior faculty joining IISc from abroad. 
So i started learning organizational structures and cultures and developed many friendships.
But my interest was kindled and I became excited by two developments initiated by Prof Dhawan .AKN started ASTRA and I got fully involved with it working with Prof Krishnaprasad. KS Jagadish was involved in developing sustainable building technologies like compressed soil blocks, composite roofing etc. ASTRA got land at a village called Ungra, about 100 kms away from Bangalore in Kunigal Taluk. 
Similarly ,KSCST was started and I got involved with it also and built a strong linkage to KSCST , getting involved with most of its activities . I got acquainted with Mr MA Sethu Rao, the first assistant secretary of KSCST. He was running the office from IPC with Panduranga assisting him. We produced the first annual report. We started a project on community biogas and I designed one for IISc employees. Our focus of use at that time was cooking. I realised electric lighting will be a better option. 
More in the next
Greetings.dks
14/11/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 896
As I discussed earlier, this association with ASTRA brought me close to the rural problems and I started looking at energy in a holistic manner.
I normally don't see a technology and start working on it. From the beginning, say from 1962 onwards,I had two principles for exploration. I don't just jump into a discipline. My two principles are:
1. Interdisciplinary - can I link another discipline with my discipline. This principle made me do a BE project on using electronics for speed measurements - stroboscope. That got enlarged during my ME days. I wanted to solve power systems problems using computers. That opened up many areas and avenues. I could create a variety of views and build a large picture of power systems planning,control and operations and that gave a clarity to the discipline of power engineering.
2. The second principle was applicability. When I looked at power systems, the application area was clear - utilities and my initial focus was planning and my later focus was control. With computers, while I initially worked on system areas like operating systems, later on I moved into a common activity seen in many sectors - transactions. I started my work on transactions processing.Banks and commerce were two major sectors where transactions were seen as the important activity and the transactions processing can be automated.While Commerce worked on it from 1980 onwards but moved forward faster, Banks started on it from 1970 onwards but were slow to move forward. 
While these two principles governed my research activities till 1975, I realised an important factor to doing better research. This brought in focus two new principles.
1. Look outside. Don't just look into the developments taking place in your disciplines. Many unknowns are waiting outside. 
2. Don't look at parts ,but understand connections. Connections may occur within a discipline like - in the case of computer science ,parts are hardware, operating systems, languages and grammar, algorithms, data, etc and these are interconnected . Recall the famous statement - Gates takes away what ever Grove gives. This explains the impact of OS on system availability or performance.
I also sensed areas which are loosing research interests. While I was in the engineering college at Madurai, I saw the syllabus was heavy with machines - motors, generators ,transformers, IC engines etc. There wasn't much of an understanding of power systems. I saw the IISc program on power systems in 1964 and quickly understood that electrical discipline was going away from machines towards systems - both power and control- and electronics. Similarly ,I learnt about analog computers and taught analog computers in 1968 ,but realised that analog computer is dying and transformed the course towards digital computing. But I found colloges teaching analog comouters even in the early eighties. I moved out of 8085 and taught 8086 and its variations, but most colleges were teaching 8085 even during the nineties. This capability of identifying obsolate topics was useful to me to be current in research. But I didn't ignore the old practices like wood burning stove.
So when I moved into ASTRA, i got several opportunities of choosing new areas based on realities. I got a holistic look at energy and its connectivities. 
1.Energy means many forms - chemical,electrical, thermal, mechanical etc.
2. We think that energy means only coal, oil and electricity. But I realized that there are more types of energy. Bio energy - bio gas, biomass - are other major sources of energy with many routes of compression. 
3. Rural people used both firewood for cooking and animal - bullock- energy for agriculture and transportation prominently in those days.
4. Energy conservation data were not available for rural areas. 
5. Energy is connected with sources, generation, transport, conversion, consumptions by many sectors. So there are many connections which can be studied. 
We- myself and Prof Krishnaprasad- ran a course on energy resources, systems, transformations and uses for engineering college faculty in 1975. I started looking at many problems of integration and use of several energy forms and also on improving energy supply and use in villages and districts. This activity continued for the next 25 years. 
Greetings. Dks
14/11/25, 3:28 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: This message was deleted
14/11/25, 3:30 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Sorry. Wrong forward. Please ignore
Dks
15/11/25, 5:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 897
 I wrote before that 1976 was a very heavy year for me.I had to manage my family with my daughter growing up and falling sick. She used to cry a lot when she got fever. We had to divert her attention by telling her that we will shift her fever to some other child in the neighbouring house. She started talking pretty early, but was frail. So I was worried. I consulted Dr Seth, a well known pediatrician living in palace orchards. We got the vaccinations done at our IISc health centre. She used to be scared of many things. She was attached to me then. She will be sitting on my lap whenever I was free and home. Both my uncles visited during this period. 
My elder uncle wanted to go to Shringeri and I accompanied him by night bus. We were to reach by 5am, but got there late, by 10am. We took bath , had darshan of Abhinava Vidyatirtha mahaswamiji. He knew about my uncle, his involvement with the village and his leadership in reviving and conducting Shankara Jayanthi in the village for more than 25 years. We had lunch in the mutt , a simple lunch. Since accommodation was not available, we decided to return by night bus to Bangalore. We got down at Yeshwantpur bus stop and reached home by 630am. As soon as my wife opened the door, my daughter jumped into my hands even before I stepped into the house. My uncle commented that she is attached to me. Whenever I got visitors and was talking to them, she would be sitting in my lap. Those were great days. Later in 2012 onwards ,I spent a lot of time with my grandson Neel. Those were also memorable days. 
I got into so many new activities. I started research on urban water supply and distribution systems while in Manchester and continued that work in Bangalore. We ,myself and my student Shirasagar, developed many methods and presented them at a CSI conference in Pune.This interest in water supply led me to the study of Bangalore water supply systems. More on that when we move to the 1980 timeline. 
I also got another project. Mr SS Murthy , member, CEA , brought a new project. It involved designing a new electrical distribution system for Bharat coking coal at Dhanbad. It also started at that time. We found it difficult to get computer time at our IBM machine. So we did the computer work at IIT Madras which got a new powerful IBM 370 computer.My friend Muthukrishnan was there. My another IISc friend S Raman was also there. I knew many faculty in the EE department. Prof Mahabala joined IIT madras by then. So I spent time discussing with him.We became great friends. More on this study in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
16/11/25, 5:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 898
Let me discuss my first consultancy project - planning a new power distribution system for Bharat Coking Coal , Jharia.It wasn't an easy task. 
The problem definition was vague - to improve their distribution system. What does it mean?
I went by the general knowledge on distribution:
The designs are poor. There are power shut downs. Costs are high. Losses are high.
So I got into an unknown situation. My job is to define the problem, describe the constraints and find solution methods. This was a challenge. There are no text book models or solutions. There were no text books then. Most practical designs used adhocism with assumed ,not realistic data- my discussions in 1969-70 with Mr Narayana Rao about data for Bangalore distribution came to mind. He didn't rely on data, didn't collect data but assumed growth rates for each region. Most substations didn't collect data. Let me discuss my exposures to different kinds of problems and my approaches to find solutions in a later post. It is an interesting learning experience for me.
I thought about the vagueness and newness of the distribution problem. I didn't run away, but wanted a novel approach to solve this. So I took the the first step that was to define the desirable outcomes of my planning exercise.
Distribution planning implied finding answers to questions :
1.What should be the optimum voltage for the next 10years ?
2.what are optimal locations for substations and what should be their sizes?
3.What should be the routing for connecting all substations and line - conductor- sizes?
4. What should be the optimal power factor? 
Unfortunately, there were no mathematical models and solution procedures available to deal with distribution systems. Power systems design of a EHV grid is well defined. We used analog models first- our use of AC network analyzer in the EE department from 1959 to 1972- and by mid sixties we moved to digital solutions. Both load flow and optimization models and solutions were developed including by me. But that was not the case for an urban distribution system.
The characteristics of electrical distribution:
Load density is higher. 
Load density varies. Load grows in each area with increased activities in houses, commercial areas, industries,and other utilities like water,transport etc. We need to estimate the load growth for each area based on past data.
New urban areas were developing. 
The entire city load grows very fast.
Improper design - use of extension philosophy- will result in a high percentage of energy losses, poor regulation, overloading and frequent power shutdowns. We saw the impact of this at the power supply at IISc in 1966 from a rural 400kv feeder and we converted IISc to 11Kv supply to reduce shutdowns and increase reliability in 1970.
So I had to devise a solution architecture and I used several models including brute force methods and searching in a big parametric space. It was challenging and I completed the work within a year successfully with a full design. 
I completed this project within a year and we had three reviews one at Delhi ,another at Kolkata with Gen Grewal, chair,Coal India and SS Murthy and a third a presentation at a conference at Ranchi. Then I wrote the final report.
Greetings. Dks
17/11/25, 4:35 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 899
The visit to Manchester university exposed me to the latest developments on computers - both hardware systems and operating systems. My foundation in OS became strong. I also got involved with performance evaluation and programming methodology. Programming methodology became the new software engineering area. My exposure to languages, particularly to ALGOL, also helped me to absorb programming methodology. These helped to develop new courses and conduct research in the scheduling aspects of OS. 
The years 1975 and 76 opened my mind. My work level was high. I got involved with three totally new areas - water supply and distribution systems , electrical distribution systems and energy systems. I completely broke the barriers in mind. Till 1970, I thought that I was an electrical engineer. These new developments broke the borders between disciplines. My mindset changed. Then slowly I diversified to new areas. So by 1976, I became a generic problem solver with a set of holistic approaches and a strong multiple ,close to 360° views on problems occurring in many disciplines. I had developed broader interdisciplinary views even beyond engineering. I had been merging solutions methods with large engineering problems. It grew further later into an integration with social constraints and user perspectives. I got a better understanding of what is engineering? I realised that it is not concepts ,not theory , not techniques , not models , not technologies but beyond all these. It is a highly interconnected , multilevel ecosystem. It is connected to the world, to the producers , the suppliers ,the transporters and the consumers. It consumes resources, changes living style, pollutes the environment, divides a society into haves and have nots. It has impacts on society, lifestyle, economy and nature.It was a great opening of my mind for me. The changes were slowly sinking in my mind during these two years.
I was teaching new courses and conducting research in new areas, teaching at PSTI and datamatics and took up big project on Jharia distribution. That itself is mouthful for a person starting a family with a new child. But there was more work. 
My involvement with KSCST led me into two new projects - one was on community biogas plant and another on electricity planning. KSCST normally built a working group around a project with faculty and user representatives. So our first project on biogas didn't have any user department. That project was the first project taken up in 1975 when AKN was not in India and Krishnaprasad was taking charge. But the second project was initiated after AKN joined back to ASTRA and KSCST. He left electro chemistry and got involved with these two organizations. 
The work on the project on electricity planning was challenging. It needed data and data was not available. So it didn't progress well. 
I almost spent more than  half an hour every day with AKN, as Krishnaprasad left the institute and went to Eindhoven.I got involved with discussions in both ASTRA and KSCST.I even attended meetings with Prof Dhawan and the then finance minister ,Ghorpade and met Mr GVK Rao, the chief secretary. That was my initial introduction to the karnataka government. I met several senior officers and politicians in the state. This practice continued and intensified for about three decades and got me involved in many projects of the state. I started learning in detail about the state. Initially ,I had a number of friends in KEB and I tried to solve the transmission design with the help of Mr TNR Rao and Mr Basavalingiah,SE technical in the early seventies. 
But in 1976, I met many IAS officers in different departments. My involvement with both DTE and DSERT started at this time and continued for many decades.
But it was ASTRA that opened my eyes further. Let us discuss it next.
Greetings
Dks
18/11/25, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 900
I was looking at engineering and solving large problems occurring in the engineering sciences and I expanded my scope to cover many aspects of engineering . I was quite successful in that effort. 
But now- in 1975-76-  I got an opportunity to add another major dimension to my knowledge and problem solving skills- looking at social and economic problems faced by people and solutions found from engineering systems. It enlarged my vision - from mostly inside views with a small window of outside- to an out - in view. I forced myself to look outside for problems, not inside. I moved away from thinking of power, water, etc towards people, their needs, their consumptions, equity,economy, affordability, finances and finding optimal and feasible solutions. It was a remarkable and wonderful shift. It changed my thinking and mindset. It enlarged my visions,understanding and perceptions.
I already had a reasonable exposure to economics - mostly technology based economics and supply side issues. I got interested in economics from childhood even before I became aware of engineering. The reasons were supply constraints, resource mobilization, inequality, poverty, and merchants tight control on the economy. I saw a full play of these in most fiction books at that time - again it was alaiosai of Kalki that gave a full picture of food scarcity and poverty. Low purchasing power in villages worried me. I saw the need for  management of micro economics while helping my uncle in the planning , gathering resources - finance, people, materials like milk,sugar, etc-, transferring information through transparent manner, accounting with integrity and implementing the plan successfully in spite of uncertainties. I realised that economics was connecting many domains and supply was the key issue.
Later I studied in high school about our five year plans. I got exposure to industrial and projects based problems. I got a vivid picture of consumption economics due to wrong planning when I heard Mr Schumachar in 1960 in Madurai. That induced me to look at economics in a mathematical optimization mirror. In 1963, I was looking at food supply issues in a student conference again as a student in Madurai. I moderated a panel then.So my interest in economics was growing steadily.
Both ASTRA and KSCST gave me some  totally different social perspectives. 
Look at technology not just from the implementation point of view ,but from many other views like
The views of consumers
The views of the society, social constraints, resources, sustainability
The impacts of trust and behaviours of people
The impacts on nature and environment.
The views of capital and economy
The views of suitability ,meeting the needs, acceptability, ease of use and adaptability
The views of technology alternatives and selections
The view of skills requirement 
The views of impacts, culture .
These opened huge doors to look at India - urban and rural, middle class and poor etc. Based on these we needed to generate policies of technology development ,adaption, and use. We were not doing this. The engineering research community  restricts itself  to a narrow window of technologies with other aspects ignored. This led to only delta improvements and not breakthroughs. We need a change to open up opportunities for great and useful research only by integrating humanities, sociology , economics ,statistics, data and AI with engineering.
 This is an urgent necessity today with AI exploding in every sector and data dominating all problem solving situations.
Greetings. Dks
19/11/25, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 901
Another opportunity I got in 1976 was the first hand experience of the growth of ASTRA and KSCST. It meant a number of diverse projects by faculty from several departments and by other institutions. Prof KS Jagadish looked at new building construction models and technologies and experimented them by building the ASTRA building in IISc and the buildings in Ungra village. Prof MV Narasimhan constructed an instrumented biogas plant. It found out that 5feet depth is enough for good digestion. So I worked on the optimization of the biogas plant. I also worked on community biogas. But my major work was on optimal integrated energy planning for a village. More on it later.
Prof Raghavan studied the design of bullock carts. Actually Prof NS Ramaswamy,IIM Bangalore came up with a new bullock cart fitted with car tyres. Prof Raghavan proved that the older design of large wheels is better for village roads. Prof SPGovindaraju came up with a new alternative design of a wind mill with a scooter tyre water pump and took up its construction in Ungra. Prof Ramaprasad was looking at water pumping and irrigation.
Dr Lokras started looking at cooking. Prof Krishnaprasad was interested in it, but left IISc. So Lokras guided by Prof R Kumar spent years on a very impactful project of designing and developing high energy wood burning stoves. I considered this project the most important and impactful one. It took more than 5 years to produce a stove with a high efficiency of about 30% . It was christened as ASTRA ole. Ole in kannada means stove. It was based on in situ construction of many chambers with mud.Let me discuss later why  I considered  this as the most impactful project? 
I was formulating my research plans on energy. The plan had many stages. It wasn’t a one shot affair. It grew step by step. My first step was to start energy connectivity at the usage end and my first focus was rural areas. I felt that I needed real data. CMIE in Mumbai was providing a lot of data. So I started focusing on getting data and looking for sources. So I started looking at the data on cooking. Very few people used gas for cooking. 90% of people used firewood as fuel . They used inefficient stoves with low efficiencies of 5 to 10%. So about 300 million tons of firewood was consumed every year. This was cited as a major reason for deforestation. Hence increasing the efficiency to 20% with a new stove will reduce the consumption by half.
Continued
Greetings. Dks
20/11/25, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 902
I was getting excited by the opportunities provided by looking at energy in an integrated form. Three threads emerged:
1.What is an optimal and sustainable plan for rural energy ? This led to a PhD work.
2.Energy studies need a lot of data - both on the supply side and consumption side. How do we get data? This was the main focus of work initially taken up by me and later supported for decades by my student TV Ramachandra. This was a long journey. Most data was captured through surveys and measurements. 
3. How do we develop optimal models for energy planning based on consumptions and quality matching? 
With these, my decades long research direction is ready. I generated many new problems as we progressed. 
During this period , I met several social scientists, economists and agriculturists. Discussions with them enlarged my outlook.
There were many changes in my thinking and understanding which started at this time -1975-76.
The first social concern was nature. Isopanishad had a deep impression. I saw destruction in action- careless destructions, mindless activities all justified. Deforestation due to cutting of trees for firewood is a good example of consumption. So the importance of environment which was there in me from childhood took some specific and strong shapes .
My first understanding in this directoion started in 1960 with Schumakar's lecture and discussions. He had the foresight and courage to provide a contrarian solution which was totally opposite to the prevailing Nehruvian philosophy of ignoring the environment or even destroying the environment. 
That led to my first focus - resource conservation. Even in the 1950s, I saw that the focus of countries has been that development means more consumption of resources and destruction of nature. 
I am a firm believer that that concept of more consumption is a destructive force heralding pralaya. Today it is more urgent.AI is unleashing more trouble for us. 
My research focused on resources minimization and frugal living. I practiced it and reduced my wants as far as possible. Even now I believe in this conservation theory strongly. I feel our entire thrust on more consumption will be destructive to all. Lokas samastha sukhino bhavanthu will be meaningless.
More in next
Greetings. Dks
21/11/25, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    903
A big clarification is needed on yesterday's post. I mentioned schumakar and his speech in 1960. But i failed to talk about the greatest influencers pushing me in that direction of resources conservation. One was my uncle, the person with the greatest religious, spiritual, ethical, frugal, financial and organizational influences on me through practical daily examples for 15 plus years. 
Another person who influenced me on a totally alternate path in my school days was Gandhi. He was the constant topic for discussion by many elders and teachers. I also read a lot of his writings. His vision and thinking about the holistic and inclusive development of India were amazing. His writings on development made a great impression on me. That was a theoretical foundation on frugal economics. But Schumakar gave a graphic picture of the ills of the western developments - an after effect of industrialization.
We think that technologies force development and spend lifetime on that aspect. That is not true. My thesis here is that while I agree that technologies have facilitated development, it is a small coterie of media and both political and economic influencers who direct the development of a country in a direction of wealth and consumption. Technologies are tools in their hands.
We are still in the 1976 period. Let me return to my department.The school of automation, my new department, was just trying to grow with a lot of false starts. The Russians were shipping old equipment. We got about 25 analog computers built using vacuum tubes in the year 1975. They were costly. Everyone was upset. The Russians were planning to send an old model digital computer. The digital computer suggested was an old model and very expensive. 
Hence, the institute, after several rounds of discussions, decided to stop the Russian collaboration. We were on our own. 
We had five professors in the school. But there was a big rift. There were two camps. One was IGS camp. Another - Deekshatulu camp with the support of three professors .Another one was neutral. So the school didn't have a good, harmonious environment. 
But it didn't affect the functioning of the faculty. We went about our work. There was enough freedom .Most of us weren't after power. So life was normal but not pleasant.I was lucky to spend time with EE for the consultancy on distribution designs and teaching a course on computer systems as well as working on projects with ASTRA and KSCST,even though I had my commitments of teaching two courses and guiding several ME students and research students. My plate was full and overflowing.So I wasn't seriously involved in the fights. IGS realised my outside support. He used to comment that I got the latest information happening in the institute. That was because , I started going for coffee with Prof CSV and I spend a lot of time with AKN. He knew that I had a lot of support not only from several senior faculty in other departments but also the fact that l had the support of Prof Dhawan. We weren't close. He didn't like me. But he needed me because of my influence with the registrar, most officers and staff in the central office. So our relationship was both distant and near when he wanted something to be done. It was ok to me. But I knew that I needed some strong strategies to counter him. Fortunately ,a big opportunity came in mid 1977.
Since we rejected the Russian supply of a computer,  IGS worked on a plan to get a computer. But we can't buy a digital computer. So he proposed a hybrid computer for aircraft simulation. Prof Dhawan, our director, supported his proposal and it was decided to set up a central facility for the proposed hybrid computer. We got an expensive hybrid computer. But our luck was that the digital part was a PDP11 computer. It was a very useful tool for the department. It was a work horse for more than 20 years and I was a major user. I was in charge of the centre for 15 years till it was wound up. We gave it to REC Trichy. More on it later.
Since IGS became the chair, Deekshatulu was not comfortable. He roped me to write a proposal for a digital control computer system. We worked hard on that. The institute already decided to support IGS's proposal for a hybrid simulator and couldn't support Deekshatulu's proposal financially. We visited ECIL,Hyderabad, Dept of Electronics Delhi and also DST,but we didn't get any funds. IGS mocked at that proposal. I saw this fight. But we were unsuccessful. Dhawan realized the tussle and gave a job in NRSA to Deekshatulu and he left IISc and moved to NRSA,Hyderabad.So IGS won. That is the politics going on in the department.
But my learnings from this failure were:
1. Don't ape another.
2.Don't compete.
3. Plan well. Adhicism doesn't work. We were clueless about the source of funds. Srikantan ,ECIL, advised us to start with a small project and not to go for a big one. Strategic thinking was missing in this project.
4.Don't support without knowing about long term support. When Deekshatulu left IISc, I felt a bit vulnerable.
More in the next.
Greetings
Dks
22/11/25, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 904
I got involved with the purchase of a new computer for the institute. The director felt that the IBM 360/44 computer was outdated and we needed to buy a new one. He set up a group to look at a suitable computer for the institute. Unlike the last time when we had no money for buying a computer and joined with NAL and DRDO to buy the computer, we had enough funds this time. The financial situation was getting better.
We still didn't have many options. We looked at ICL's 2900 series - designed and built based on the MU5 of the Manchester university - and had discussions with them. I was not happy with their software support and even maintenance support . So we were not impressed. But what struck me as strange was their argument that IBM's concept of designing computers with byte-8 bits- as the basic unit was inefficient. They didn't see that the world was moving that way. It became a standard to use 8,16,32,64,128 bits as standard word lengths for computers .DEC had been moving in that direction when they designed PDP/11 as a 16 bit machine. ECIL also designed TDC16 and 32 computers with 16 bits and 32 bits. By 1976, they came out with 16 bits computers.ICL had no idea about the direction. I didn't find any advantage in buying their computer. 
We had a good relationship with IBM for about six years as they were maintaining the 360 computer ,but IBM,s 370 wasn't well suited for our use even though IIT Madras had purchased one a few years back. Also IBM computers were expensive. Amdahl, the chief designer, left IBM and started his company. Further, only IIM Ahmedabad realised the advantage of time sharing computers with user terminals and bought a HP mini computer. 
We knew that Prof R Narasimhan created a new  UN funded  national centre for software development. He purchased a computer for their use distinct from the TIFR facility. He had purchased a newly designed DEC10 computer. It was also one of the first machines in the world with a good network model based database systems. It supported time sharing and had a user friendly OS, not very good ,but better than both IBM and ICL.  Prof RN focused on design and graphics areas as well as languages like Pascal. Both Deekshatulu and I visited TIFR to attend a course on computer graphics.I got travel grants from Prof RN to attend a week long course. We traveled to Bombay via Guntakal. Since Deekshatulu's father in law was a senior officer of railways security force, we were received by RPF officers and later put in the Bombay train- it was a Madras to Bombay express train. That train was crowded but we managed. I stayed through the course. It was useful. I also got an exposure on Pascal. Since I was an admirer of Algol at university of Manchester, I liked Pascal and decided to make my ME students to work on Pascal. C was yet to make an appearance then. 
I met Mr Hemant Sonawala during this course. They took responsibility for supplying, installing and maintaining the computer. Hinditron company was well known in supplying quality oscilloscopes - Tektronics. I had met Mr Gandhi, another boss of Hinditron before in late sixties.
But I had doubts about DEC 10's scalability and its capability to handle large IISc students workload. At NCSDCT, the new centre at TIFR, the DEC10 was not used by a large number of users. It had only a few tens of users unlike iisc where several hundreds were the users then. 
Prof RN visited IISc and convinced our director about buying DEC 10. He also convinced IIT Kanpur to buy this machine. Our biggest advantage was the affordability. It was sold at a low cost compared to IBM- almost at half the IBM cost. So we bought a DEC 1090 computer, but that was in 1978 or so.
It wasn't a great decision. We got into problems from 1980 onwards. It couldn't handle our work load. More on this later. But one thing was that  I got involved in looking at our computer centre problems by the directors - bothProf Dhawan and later Prof Ramaseshan-  in decision making about the centre operations for the next 5 years. 
Greetings
Dks
23/11/25, 4:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 904
There was another activity that I got into was on the computerization of our students' applications process. 
After returning from a short stay in Manchester, Mr Nanjunda Rao took charge of our academic section after Mr R Vaidyanathan left IISc to go to Canada. After my return from Manchester, I became close to Mr Nanjunda Rao and met him several times. He came home to our Malleswaram place a few times. We were once discussing the admissions procedure. I was involved with students admissions from 1967 onwards. I worked with Mr Vaidyanathan and Seshadri ,in charge of students section.But  Seshadri died suddenly and Vaidyanathan left. I had introduced many reforms in admissions process, the most successful one the introduction of the entrance exam for BE admissions in 1968.
The other laborious process done manually was the tabulation of students' essential data on to a large table. So I told NanjundaRao that we can automate the tabulation and merit listing using computers. A small group started working on my suggestion. There were lots of heated discussions on the approaches and methodology. Since I had differences on the approach, I delinked myself from the group. The group made the filling of the admissions application form very complicated and I didn't like it. 
After two years of that practice, the group which was implementing the software moved to my concept of ease of filling in the applications. The concept that was recommended by me was to put boxes after each of the relevant items and it is followed even now universally. 
By this time , I had a diverse set of experiences in problem solving. Let me summarize my learnings:
1. In the case of a decision for a higher voltage ,the CBIP committee was influenced by BHEL to go for 400KV instead of a much better alternative of 500kv.
2. I designed IISc's first 11kv power network with many new features like a new KEB incoming station, 11KV ring main, several 11kv/400 volts substations and LT rings. It was not affected by ego constraints. The only constraint was cost constraint. It was a pure technical exercise done in 1968.
3. One of the complicated problem solving that I encountered was the introduction of a credit based, flexible unit system curriculum . I learnt a lot here. There were many decision points, strong opinions, discussions. But we could sail through the rough seas. I saw how senior faculty and the director handled the problems in a very mature way. It was a great understanding and learning for me at an early age in 1969-70. Similarly, I solved the time table management successfully.
4.I could build a proper scientific procedure for the distribution system project for Jharia coal fields. I could convince the leaders. I was alone responsible for decisions here. So it was easy.
5. In the case of deciding a computer for IISc, we chose DEC 10. Cost was the consideration here as well as Prof RNs push.
6. In the case computerization of our admissions, non expertise and non understanding were the problems. It was a joint meeting. I couldn't convince others. 
These learnings were building blocks of my problem solving expertise and helped me in dealing with hundreds of problems faced by several organizations,government departments and banks. Particularly, both the curriculum design and distribution planning problems led me towards many important activities- problem discovery, problem decomposition,solution discovery, alternatives, data discovery,requirements analysis, decision making methods and skills. I developed my own processes for solving problems. I looked at most problems not in the traditional way and didn't solve them using traditional methods. I wanted to discover some thing new, some thing different that would improve the solutions. That became my regular thinking activity through out my life. 
Greetings. Dks
24/11/25, 3:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 905
Another clarification is needed.
When I wrote about IGS vs BLDeekshatulu tussle and the purchase of hybrid computer ,I didn't expect it to give a totally erroneous picture of IISc.
There was a misinterpretation that IISc is like any other government office with lots of politics and power play. I want to dispel that interpretation through this clarification. 
Most Indians, particularly educated ones and more particularly academics, have egos. These egos lead to jealousy and contests. It is a normal occurrence in all organizations. Our scriptures say ," remove ahamkara" but we all love it and build a mountain of ego. That is why a child is adorable. 
What we need to address is the answer to the question -does such ego clashes lead to disruption in the functioning of the organization? That is important. 
Many organizations address this human natural ego instinct through strict disciplinary rules ,governance and processes and that leads to fear and curbs innovation. 
But I want to state that IISc ambiance and work culture is very different. We ignore egos. The effect of egos is marginal. Politics is transient and harmless at IISc .
There is a lot of openness in our working. You decide what you want to do and prepare your action plans accordingly. Your respect and recognition come from your work, not your status.
Secondly, there is transparency. You know what is happening in the department. Not many secrets.
Thirdly, there is a lot of freedom to work. That is the most remarkable feature of IISc,not found in other places. The only other place with freedom is TIFR.
Fourthly, most people in positions of importance have limited powers. There is a well defined process for individual assessments and promotions. This applies to all, both faculty and employees. There is no possibility of one person having powers to destroy another. 
Fifthly, fairness prevails mostly. Grievance mechanisms exist.The processes are fair. This minimizes your anguish and brings in happiness.
Finally, IISc looks for excellence in a person's outputs in research, teaching,consultancy,sponsored projects,social activities and not on anything else. The evaluation follows many levels and many people. So most work without fear or favour. 
Work goes on despite ego clashes. Human behaviours are secondary. 
IISc is a great place to work. I loved working there and am happy with my involvements and associations. 
Hope the clarifications are clear.
Let me get back to my timeline 1976.
Bangalore city was growing and expanding. The government didn't spend money on infrastructure like power, roads and telecom. 
This resulted in power-cuts - both demand cuts and energy cuts. So IISc started buying diesel generating sets. Many sets were purchased by individual faculty members. Still, we felt that many activities and lab work were getting affected. So I was requested to talk to KEB chief engineer to get exemption from power cut for IISc. I visited KEB office, met Mr BG Rudrappa,chief engineer and made the request. He said he would do his best. We got some relief. This situation continued for more than a decade. 
Since Prof Dhawan had to handle both IISc and department of Space ,he decided to appoint a joint director. Prof Ramaseshan, who was with NAL and an eminent materials science researcher, was appointed as a joint director. I had lots of interactions with him.
Another great personal news for me was the birth of my son in December 1976 in Mysore.
Greetings
Dks
25/11/25, 4:44 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 906
My experiences in 1976 were not completely described. Two more important aspects will be described here.
Indira Gandhi declared an emergency and the situation in the country was one of fear. Everyone was worried that he or she may be arrested. Sanjay Gandhi took the law in his hands.
One day in mid 76, Mr SS Murthy met us and talked about an incident. Indira Gandhi was going to an event and power went off. Everyone panicked. So as an immediate measure ,a mobile DG set was added to her entourage.But the government wanted a permanent solution. So I got another project- study the Delhi electrical distribution system. They felt that the system needed a complete revamp.
This was ten times more complicated than the Jharia problem. Delhi had an archaic electricity system. 
So first, I should know the characteristics of the existing system to be followed by discovery of the current problems and then identify the outputs to be determined sustainable for ten years. Then we conduct the study starting with input data, methodologies and getting the outputs. Followed by the output would be detailed designs.
The first task was to understand the system. It meant two pronged approaches. First was the discussions we had with senior engineers in Delhi. We visited Delhi and went to meet the chairman along with Mr Murthy. The chief engineer, Mr Sawhney, explained the situation. Delhi gets hydro power from BEAS project, it had thermal power stations at Indraprastha and Badarpur and it imported power from MP. Unfortunately these three were not synchronized and so there were scheduled supply switch offs everyday once or twice. This was one cause of power interruptions. The internal distribution voltage was 33kv and 11kv. The most important distribution line was a complete 33kv line along the inner ring road. 
The second approach was we spent the next three days going through Delhi inspecting the 33KV line, substations, switching points, IP thermal power plants, incoming sub stations and LT 400 volts distribution. We learnt a lot. 
1.The system is pretty old. Bombay had a much better and modern system. So substations needed to be modernized.
2.The practices were archaic . There were 16 taps from the 33 kv line running in the ring road to connect to a 33/11kv substation. This was the worst encounter I had. Protection was poor. There was a good chance of sparking and fire. Most substations lacked instrumentation and control. 
3.There was no standardization. Each substation was of a different size. 
4.There were four levels of voltages -220kv to be upgraded to 400kv used for transporting power to Delhi from outside, 33kv ,11kv and 400volts. 
5. The real chaos was the LT distribution in buildings. We visited a shop in Chandni chowk. The engineer took us inside . It was going deep inside with many shops ,godowns - warehouses- , residences etc for about a length of more than 500 metres. A single LT connection had a connected load equalling about 200kw. Normally this would be 10kw max in house connections. Here rules were flouted. Politics played a key role here. Tariffs couldn't be increased. We were shocked by what we saw.
6. We studied the line diagram. Again another shock. There were many overhead lines and underground cables mixed together. 
7. We used a better jointing system at IISc. I introduced Raychem process to join two cables or a cable to an overhead line and discarded the old taping method of jointing that I first learnt at the Meenakshi mills in Madurai in 1961. But here in Delhi ,they were using the old tape based jointing.
8. The entire system was not properly designed. Extension philosophy was used. Overloading is common. Voltage regulation was poor. Everyone bought voltage stabilizers for many devices like refrigerator, TV etc. This practice was common across the country for decades.
9. There were no design engineers in the Delhi electric supply undertaking. 
So you see the complexity. Multiple surgeries were needed. 
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
26/11/25, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 907
Let me continue with Delhi study.
The study was challenging. I don't want to go through the various processes.
As usual the decision questions were:
1. Is 33kv the optimum voltage or the next higher 66kv voltage better?
2. What are the optimum sizes of conductors, transformers, substations?
3. Optimal location of substation
4. Network routing
5.best power factor
6. Improve reliability
7. Modernize designs
I will just illustrate a few points here. 
1.we fortunately got a senior engineer to work with us. He got me data as required.
2. I did the first round analysis and came up with a standard voltage of 66kv for sub transmission. 
3. I suggested methods to modernize the inner ring road.
4. I suggested installation of automatic change switches for operations without interruptions. 
5.I suggested to go for ring mains and duplicate networks for improving reliability. 
6.I divided the regions, calculated the predicted load after 10 years for each region and optimized the numbers and sizes of substations for each region. I used branch and bound method to build ring mains connecting the 66kv/11kv substations.
The whole work was over by late 1977.
Two more important things were started at that time. Both were related to ASTRA and KSCST.
KSCST made two critical selections . Both NV Krishna and Amarnath Bhat from IIMs joined as systems analysts. Both were committed, took a lot of interest in development issues. They started monitoring about 10 projects. I had involvements in two. Bangalore university decided to abolish project work for civil engineering program. I got panicky and felt we should do something. So we had months of discussions. Several IISc faculty like KS Jagadish, Ramaprasad, Lokras, SPG, were involved in the discussions. Towards the middle of 1977 ,a detailed methodology was evolved. Due to intense discussions and hard work ,a complete strategy , a mechanism for selection, evaluation procedures were evolved. Initially, it was decided to focus on rural technology problems. In order to help the students, a list of about 100 titles was prepared. It focused on agriculture operations, irrigation pumping, bio gas, solar, cooking stoves, rural artisans like potters ,blacksmith, toy makers, jaggery making, use of rural materials like mud blocks, etc. Focus was on manual energy and animal energy use. While this was felt useful, it became an impediment within a few years. The program started in 1978 and it became a standard bearer for KSCST. It has become very successful. Several engineering colleges participate in this program.
Continued in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
27/11/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    908
AKN wanted to direct project work to focus on rural technologies so as to improve work efficiencies and support operations . His focus was on mechanical aspects. I wanted to strengthen project work to go deeper into technologies. There was a difference in our thinking just like in bio-gas. But the program was designed with the prepared list suggesting only rural activities and simple constructions using animal and human power. So most colleges were not happy. While some were eager to participate ,many were reluctant because of the rural thrust. Some even derided the program including a few in the institute itself. Fortunately, they accepted solar heating systems and wind mills,but didn't accept biogas plants. 
 I had several heated arguments with many faculty in many engineering colleges. Mostly the arguments came from the mechanical engineering department faculty. I said we need to open our eyes, know what is happening in rural areas and help them to improve operations. I also told them that we wanted to focus on modeling, design and problem solving skills in students.Then I challenged them to model a wood stove or a mud pot refrigeration. They said," those are trivial problems.". I disagreed and said they are complex modeling activities.
The focus was on construction in most cases. So the students were excited. Many water lifting pumps, solar water heaters, cooking stoves,wind mills, hand operated devices, better potter's wheels etc were built. 
All projects were inspected by a team of faculty from IISc. The motives were to encourage proper designing and selection of materials ,sizing and experimentation.At the end, we conducted a seminar cum exhibition in a college. 
I wasn't present fully during the first year of the students project program as I was in IIT Bombay at that time, but visited Bangalore four times in a year. More on it later.
I started changing the selection process to include electronics in a big way - electronics devices were becoming prominent in many sectors including hospitals and power electronics was gaining traction. This led to more participation from many colleges and all departments. Slowly, we moved towards more computer projects. 
This became a transformative project. It improved the students' understanding of practical engineering, and rural problems. It allowed them to think innovatively and conduct projects as a holistic problem solving activity. Its success was also due to the involvement of several IISc faculty and KSCST staff ,the excitement of students, the involvement of faculty and the support of the principals and HoDs. This program is continuing even now. That is the proof of its success.
When we started our trust FAER in 2005, we decided to replicate this in a modified manner. We changed our focus towards technology generation, interdisciplinary focus and innovation.
I had several learnings from this program. 
1. Success of a project depends on 
Detailed planning
Clarity of objectives- why it is initiated
Participation and discussions
Involvement of many
Deep interest
Gaps in identification, focus and solutions.
Involvement in running the program.
Involvement of IISc in the evaluations and advice.
Financial support
Final evaluation 
2. The need for reviews , constant improvements and change of focus from rural to modern technology.
3. The need to convince faculty to think on our lines on the need to improve villages. It was an education process.
4. Strong networking with hundreds of faculty, principals and hods. I got an opportunity to meet hundreds of faculty. It enlarged my understanding. I got a realistic picture of various engineering colleges in Karnataka. I saw the respect they had for IISc. My vision became larger. I also had a lot of discussions with faculty and students.
Greetings. Dks
28/11/25, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 909
Though I was keen on the focus and activities of ASTRA and had a synergistic thinking with Krishnaprasad, I found myself an odd man in the group. I was more a systems person and a power and computer person and many felt my areas have no relevance to ASTRA. All others were technology oriented persons. I wasn't a believer in rural technologies. I thought that you couldn't chain rural people to traditional technologies like bullock carts, manual water lifting and agriculture operations for long. I saw people accepting pocket radio receivers and plastics.I felt that what we needed was an adaptation mechanism- a new type of engineering. I was a firm believer in renewable energy and bio energy. My focus was on conservation, optimization, enrichment of the environment. I was thinking about the approaches to solve the problems connected to those aspects. The answers were modeling and data generation.
I have so far talked about how I acquired new knowledge and moved into new areas. I wanted to explain why I understood a new area and started working in that area. We talk about data today. I started not only looking on data but working on data from both sides- generation and organization- from 1976 itself.
I saw computer science developments moving into a new direction. Most computer research till 1975 was on hardware and programming / algorithms. They continued afterwards also. But a new thinking emerged. After E F Codd developed his relational data model in 1970 , researchers in US started looking at data in a new way.So data became important as a separate topic of research. We realized that data is independent of actions. Data lives outside actions. Till then, data was embedded into a program. Data was transient and died. You created data, used it and threw it away. But the database concept gave a new look to data. 
The first change in our problem view was: don't look at an application like payroll , but look at an organization in a holistic way- its components, characteristics , connections and actions.
Data base hypothesized that data is permanent,it is independent of actions and applications, it is an essential component of an organization,and it gets used in all programs developed for different applications. Also there were two types of data - data internal to an organization like employee details, salary details, etc and dynamic data that is created due to the daily interactions the organization has with the outside world like purchases of materials, payments, visitors details, sales details etc. That is a whole new reality. We removed one illusion -perception.
While I started to add a new area- databases- to my research activities , I also looked at realistic ways of data collection. Economists have always been concerned with country's data and statisticians focused on data collection and analysis. Prof Mahalanobis created a great collection system. I looked at the data with both central and state government, more at the state government data available at taluk level. CMIE became another source for me. 
We decided to collect primary data through a survey. We believed that reality of a village would be revealed by actual data. So we got about four people to collect data from six villages based on a well prepared questionaire by visiting each household , no sampling. This was our energy consumption survey conducted by ASTRA in 6 villages near Ungra where our extension centre was located. That made me work with actual data. So I worked in a two directional approach on data - one database in CS and another generation and analysis of data to understand the reality. These two areas of research continued for the next 25 years. I will explain my work on energy consumption in detail later.
Greetings. Dks
29/11/25, 3:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 910
Prof HN Chanakya ,an early faculty who joined ASTRA, has written detailed comments on rural technology. His comments are:
Yes.  Very well brought out.  Thanks for bringing out a discussion on this subject.These were interesting times and deserve some soul searching.Many schools of thought of that period merely built upon existing practices or devices without understanding the underlying phenomena.  Your allusion to the biogas plant is a good example...Biogas plants were evolved with an "artisanic" bent of mind where the end device relied on repetitive earlier practice rather than an "engineered process /design" approach.  Your papers on design optimization during 1980 triggered engineered designs across the world.  These early efforts at ASTRA-KSCST had triggered attempts to create "novel and targeted" technological jnnovations and continue today even after nearly 50 years.The first GI based solar water heaters, vertical axis windmills, water pumps built upon "intermediate or grassroot" technological innovations addressed real and felt rural needs.  They consciously avoided photocopied options.I remember another key strategy or approach was the use of /deploying a systems approach and carring capacity of the ecosystem.  This highlighted the strong interconnected-ness and is once again a first /trail blazer in the field of Rural Development /Technologies.These outcomes very clearly defined R&D agendas for many an institution during that period.Strangely, today's Rural Tech units across the country are neither aware nor understand the need for the participative processes in rural technology and related R&D.  Could you throw light on what is lacking in today's Rural innovation predominantly created by urban trained actants.  Has the rural urban divide disappeared or is it reappearing in a different form?
My response
Chanakya brought out several aspects of our early days -1974 to 1980. While we know that ASTRA associate  faculty did innovative work on biogas, windmills, soil compacted bricks, composite roofs solar water heaters and very importantly astra ole, our focus was unclear. I felt that the focus on renewable energy was good,but the belief that there exist a new animal called rural technologies is wrong. I had strong disagreements with KSCSTs initial focus on rural technologies. One grass cutter built by a college was not safe. While operating the grass cutter, the blade flew and cut the hand of a young person in Bhairumbe. 
As Chanakya says,we had extensive discussions on the philosophy of ASTRA for several years in Bangalore, Gandhigram,Hubli,Madras,Bombay ,Delhi and many other institutions as well as with both state and central government officials. But opinions were divisive. 
I think our understanding of rural problems was weak. That is why focus on rural technologies disappeared from both ASTRA and KSCST by 1985 itself. It is not a fancy subject. That is unfortunate.Is climate change an important subject for ASTRA?
Technologies are not different ,but engineering is different. We didn't focus on engineering. 
We had no problem architect in both organizations and so no problem discovery happened.  Only Suresh Raina was serious about social aspects. None other had social interest. That was a tragedy. We all looked at technologies and not usability aspects. We need to address social acceptability.
That leads me to your last point. 
Rural urban divide exists, but academics have no interest in it. Surprisingly, the rightist government of PM Mr Modi adopted urban solutions to rural areas. Swatch Bharat scaled up the toilets program in all villages. The subsidized LPG, though wrong, took cleaner cooking to rural households.The focus on broadband to all is a very useful step. There is an approach change here. 
I hope we take AI to address three issues of people - rural and urban -
1.Health with ecommerce and econsulting focus
2.Agriculture production , wastage reduction in storage,distribution, and post harvest marketing
3.Education and social services.
There is a totally different take from me on this topic - a sociology angle. I will discuss it in the next post.
Greetings
Dks
30/11/25, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 911
A correction. Vinod Vyasulu reminds me - it is Dhruv Raina not suresh Raina. Sorry for the error. It is Dhruv . I still remember him and his interview for selection at KSCST.
"Are we really homo sapiens - wise humans?
Nobody disputes that humans today have a lot more information and power than in the Stone Age, but it is far from certain that we understand ourselves and our role in the universe much better.
Why are we so good at accumulating more information and power, but far less successful at acquiring wisdom?"
Yuval Harari    Nexus
Look at any area you want to develop. How do you go about it?
There is the popular approach. Try to invent a problem based on your perception and knowledge. That is what ASTRA did? It looked at problems perceived by newspapers and some so called experts. They said - improve agricultural operations, provide better cooking facilities, provide stronger and inexpensive housing ,provide better transport than a bullock cart, better water lifting etc. That was what ASTRA did. The early researchers left ASTRA and the in house persons got bored and found climate change attractive.
That is a weak perception based, lazy approach. 
We need to start with perception. Most decisions are unfortunately taken based on ones beliefs ,ideas and understandings. Again, understandings of a person is based on ones knowledge, readings and mappings on the read information with the existing knowledge. Cognition is restrictive and additive, not transformative, not changeable in most cases.
Our knowledge of solutions for problems faced by people is based on a silos approach. We look at many parts but miss the whole . But what I see is that we miss many parts also.
The best approach is to look for problems faced by people and get the best technology solution, none of our ideas and ideals please.So go from society to problems to solutions to technology , not the other way.This is crucial but hard. It will make us great researchers and lead to fundamental changes. Wisdom will come.
We need to understand there is no stand alone technology. What we have is a strongly interconnected system. That a practical system has the following subsystems:
Physical system- technology and tasks together.
Energy unit
Control unit
Computer and data
Communications
Marketing and logistics
Culture
People
We normally ignore the last two. All physical systems are socio technical physical systems. We may refer to irrigation, energy, transport, agriculture operations, food materials, but ignore the users. 
Computer systems and software ignored users . Then came user friendly system. Internet and web changed every thing. Mobile and social networks focus on people.
Take agriculture. The country had several hundreds of practices and we just ignore them. In those days ,we looked at bullock carts and were against tractors. We assumed ownership. But hiring concept changed the scene today. We see lots of tractors and bullock carts are disappearing. Our ideal solution for agriculture was organic fertilizers and pesticides. That didn't succeed. Yield goes down. The farmer goes bankrupt. 
APMC is an important institution - one stop solution provider. We didn't address marketing. I computerized APMCs in the early eighties.
When I designed the 1000 school computerization program for Karnataka, people suggested that i should not go for the latest PCs. But I went for the latest PCs. Similarly, they was opposition to teach MS office. One group suggested to use open source, another to go for non existing Kannada office. I rejected that. Similarly a strong Kannada group wanted to translate technical terms. I refused and retained English names for easy understanding. Otherwise, storage unit becomes ugrana and computers, calculators become ganaka yantra.
We had issues with broadband in banks during 2000 period. We wanted to connect all branches of a bank to its data centre. It was tough. We found the deep valleys in Himalayas didn't get signals. So we ran cables to the top and connected a VSAT terminal there. So problem centric approach is needed. Choose a technology that is correct for each situation. Don't preach one solution. We may find thousands of solutions. 
To conclude: 
1.Go for inclusive systemic solutions, acceptable to people. Don't go for past inferior solutions.
2.Study a process deeply. Get a good understanding of a society or community. Find gaps in their life style. See how many are affected and get solutions. Solutions can be many ,not one, not universal. 
3.Don't push your ideas, your theories . Search for appropriate and sustainable answers. We went for climate change and ignored water pollution.
4.Research focus should change from extension of a known technology to finding problems - discover problems at ground level. Solve the garbage problem.
We need to focus on sociology ,not on technology alone. Find systemic solutions. Systems should not be studied from mathematical perspectives alone.
Thanks Chanakya.
Greetings. Dks
01/12/25, 3:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 912
Let me get back to the 76-77 period. We started the detailed consumption survey in 1976 and completed it by mid 1977. 
We prepared a long questionnaire. It included many aspects like 
Food,types,sources, consumptions
Work schedules for all in the house
Activities like water - source, consumption, time to bring it home, firewood - quantity, purchase or gathering, who does it, quantity used per day, cooking - what, time spent,fuel used, types of choola or stove, cattle and other animals, grazing, milk, agriculture operations in depth. Lighting, kerosene or electricity.
Monthly income, purchases.
By mid 1977, all completed questionnaires were available. It was my task to analyze them. Since the data contained was quite a lot, it was agreed to computerize the data and perform the necessary analysis. But the big problem was to convert the data from the paper to a machine readable form. That was not easy. I was thinking about it. But in the meantime something else happened that delayed the processing work.
My family life was busy with two kids. My daughter started speaking early, but was feeling afraid of many things and she was falling sick many times. My son didn't reveal his true nature at that time. He was also falling sick. 
I consulted my uncle Dr Ramakrishnan. He suggested that I may consult Dr Balakrishnan ,the retired professor of pediatrics from JIPMER who was living in Jayanagar. I went to see him with my daughter. He wasn't a helpful person. He increased my worries. He gave me a big list of tests. At that time, we didn't have a lab nearby. So I decided to get the tests done in JIPMER. 
We went by train to Madras and bus to Pondicherry. We stayed for three days, got the tests done. My son fell sick one day. The tests were normal. The doctor there said that the tests were unnecessary. We returned by bus to Madras. A passenger sitting next to me was smoking. I requested him to move back. But he refused. My son vomited in the seat on the bus. Anyway, he was fine once we reached Madras.But vomiting became common with him. He had my temperament - start vomiting when I had a severe headache or fever. We returned to Bangalore.
I continued with my teaching ,and  research and worked on the Delhi project. I had to make a few trips to Delhi for discussions and clarifications.
In September/ October 1977, I was called for interview for the post of professor at IIT Bombay. I went to Bombay by train and stayed with RD Kumar, whom I met in Manchester and was a good friend. I met Prof Kekre with Kumar. I met Prof Isaac, I knew him before.I attended the interview the next day. Prof RN was the expert. Dr Mehndiratta was another candidate. The interview went off well. I talked about my work on simulation languages. Prof RN asked me the language I used. I said FORTRAN. Pascal came later. He wasn't happy,but appreciated my efforts in building queue data structures in FORTRAN.
Kumar took me to meet Isaac in the evening. Isaac said that I was selected as a professor. I expressed my worries that Prof Dhawan may not like it. 
I discussed with AKN after my return. He was also not happy. Adter discussions, I agreed that I would return back if promoted as associate professor at IISc. I had submitted my papers for assessment for promotions. We had a truce.
So my next journey was about to begin.
Greetings
Dks
02/12/25, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 913
I instantly decided to go to IIT as the offer was good ,it will improve my academic standing and I will have time to think about the future by living in a new environment and staying away from a known environment .
I wasn't afraid of moving to Bombay. IIT agreed to give me a faculty quarters. I had gone to Bombay several times and so it was a familiar place. Even as a child, I read Kalki's and Mayavi's description of Bombay, Matunga. I was fascinated by Bombay. I loved the Colaba and VT area. Further, I had a relative - Venkitachalam,a cousin by marriage , who was living in Tilaknagar and working in RBI. ABL, husband of my wife's elder sister, had moved to Bombay and his family was living in Cheddanagar.So we had people to depend on. Also, my job at IISc was safe. I wont resign but go on leave without salary. 
I needed to prepare for leaving Bangalore to go to IIT Bombay. Those two plus years were very productive. I wrote three reports -each about 250 pages. It gave me a lot of confidence in my writing skills. I started working on designing energy systems for rural areas and built an optimal model. It was published. Similar optimization work was done to design bio-gas plants and that was also published. Then I moved into database research activity also. Another area I got into was performance metrics and measurements. So I was happy. 
Another development was happening which would take me to another level. I used to meet Madhav Gadgil frequently and started discussing with him about energy and environment. Gadgils lived close to our house. It took a few years to move forward. An opportunity came in 1980.That gave another path for me for the next 20 years. More on this later. 
What is an interesting observation for me was that opportunities come with several steps,through many discussions with many colleagues and acquaintances as well as some surprises. We should know it and catch it fast to get a meaningful life. Networking is very important for everyone to move up qualitatively in life. That is a very big lesson I learnt at a very young age. I am a shy person. So networking wasn't easy. But I succeeded. 
I discussed with AKN. We felt that I should complete the processing of the data collected for energy surveys in 6 villages. I agreed to come in summer and spend a month in KSCST to take care of some activities of ASTRA.Then I applied to IISc for a year's leave of absence. I got my letter forwarded by IGS without any problem. Prof BS Ramakrishna, who was the divisional chair,approved my leave.
I completed the Delhi project and submitted the report. Prof KS Prabhu, who was the chair of EE, was upset about my leaving IISc. He was worried as to who will teach my computer systems course in the EE department. It was a core course for ME students.
I had started to teach a new course on real time systems. I would complete it by December 1977. So I planned to leave by December end. Again,I decided to retain my 11th main house, not leave it. I decided not to take everything in the house with us to Bombay. That meant that I was planning to come back. I had a very strong attachment to IISc and Bangalore. I didn't want to leave Bangalore permanently.I was looking for a change from the School of Automation's strained atmosphere for some time.
I decided to send by road transport necessary utensils,beds, cots,dining table and chairs to Bombay- the minimum items needed to continue our life in Bombay. I decided to leave the rest - almyrahs, cupboards etc in the middle room. I released the LPG connection also.I decided to sublet the house for a year. Mr Govinda Rao was a research student in the EE department. He agreed to take my house for a year. He agreed to pay a part amount of rent. I said ok. I said he could move by December end. 
So while I was planning to move to IIT,another surprise happened. I will describe it in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
03/12/25, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 914
After most aspects of our moving to IIT were decided, I fixed a date for travel in December. Then came the surprise.
A cable came from US inviting AKN to attend a workshop in January 1978  first week at Harvard. AKN wasn't interested. So I took a decision to go. So it meant that I had to do many things.
First, I needed to inform Director Prof AK De and get his approval to delay my joining by a month. I wrote a letter and got his approval. 
Second I had to get a US Visa. Fortunately my passport was obtained in 1971 and it was extended in 1976. So it was operational. Fortunately, it was not as crazy as now to get an appointment for a US visa. I had to go to Madras to get the visa. I went and got the visa easily when I showed the invite cable. So that was solved. 
The next thing is travel planning. We had a travel agent by name Gopal. He got a ticket by Air France via Paris. When I went to Manchester in 1974, I had to waste a day visiting the airlines office to get a ticket. There was no travel agent for international travel then. The ticket was from Bangalore to Bombay to Paris to JFK to Boston and back. I had to return to Bangalore and then leave for Bombay. The schedule was a tight one,almost impossible today. I had a short time interval at JFK of an hour. I needed to come out, get my baggage and take a bus to another terminal to check in for the Boston flight. It is not possible today.Even then, it was crazy. I don't know why I took that risk. Travel agents take you through a rosy path but with hidden problems. I was a novice and believed him. I got wiser afterwards, and decided to double check their information.
 I had dealt with several travel agents afterwards and found their information unreliable. Only two were giving me pragmatic information, others promised me the moon.
The next was a big worry. Where do I stay in Boston? I consulted Prof V Krishnan and Mr TKS Iyengar,our librarian. They suggested YMCA. I wrote to the organizer to arrange for my stay there and pick me from Logan airport. He responded positively. So that aspect was taken care of. 
The next worry was the cold. It was January, winter season in the US. So what should I have as a protection? Prof Krishnan said that my UK top coat won't be sufficient. He gave me an additional jacket and said that I should use both.
The next problem to be solved was the fact that I promised Mr GovindaRao that I would vacate the house by December. But the situation had changed now. My family had to stay till January middle. So we decided to vacate the house by December end and that my wife and children would move to Madras and stay there till my return. 
Greetings. Dks
04/12/25, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 915
There was something worrying me a lot. I had not informed Prof Dhawan personally my decision. I felt that I should tell him directly not through someone. I went to the director's office and gave a request seeking time to meet him. Mr L Raghavendra Rao, his secretary told me that the director is busy and he wont give any advice to me. I, usually a dumb guy, was smart at that time and requested him to inform the director and I would abide by his decision. 
Prof Dhawan agreed to meet me. Rao was surprised. The meeting was scheduled in the fourth week of December 1977. The council was meeting at 1030am  . I got an appointment at 930 am and Rao told me to take only five minutes and come out. I said ok. But the meeting lasted 40 minutes. I promised the director that I would be taking a firm decision by june1978 on my return to IISc and he promised me that the processing of my papers for promotion wont be stopped. He was philosophical and told me that he cant ask me to stay back and not go to IIT. So I came out with a lot of clarity. Rao was unhappy that I took a long time with the director. So I was all set to go to Boston and then to Bombay. 
Let me discuss my long journeys next.
I left with my family for Madras by December end. Then I returned to Bangalore . I left on second January 1978 for New York. I had only a small bag with my dresses and two top coats were held in my hand. The journey was smooth. It was a big jumbo 747 plane. Seats were comfortable. Flight was not full. I liked the Paris airport. Its design was not linear like most airports, but it had many satellites connected by tunnels. I don't remember what I ate on the two flights. But it was definitely vegetarian.I was allowed to sit near the exit on the Paris to NY flight so that I could finish immigration and customs faster. I did both in a jiffy.I had a small delay at customs as I had a sealed box of Indian sweets given by my wife's friend for her brother. I explained it to them and they allowed me to go.I had no checked in baggage, a big advantage.I took a bus to the other terminal and boarded the Boston flight.
This is the first major international workshop I attended without preparation.
More in the next
Greetings
Dks
05/12/25, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    915 
The flight to Boston was for an hour. About 60% of the people smoke. I experienced this problem of smoking in doors in Manchester and I felt it here. It gave me a headache, but not a severe one. It went off on getting out and breathing the fresh air. They didn't serve any food in the flight - only coffee and soft drinks. Another cultural difference with Europe that I observed was that they used a lot of ice with soft drinks. The glass was filled to half with ice. I didn't see this large use of ice in Europe. Also, coke was a common drink in the US then. Sure,I had coke in the UK also. But people preferred beer to coke there. The consumption of coke was less. 
I arrived in Boston by 6pm. At that time and later on for several years , I found that people who came to receive friends could walk up to the gate. A passenger didn't have to come out and search for them as it happens now. That was not the case with international flights. The US didn't have a security procedure then. India had a strong security check by then.
So immediately on exiting from the gate ,I was relieved to see a person from Meta systems waiting there. He put me up in a motel. It was close to Harvard and he suggested that I could walk to the workshop hall. The motel was good. I felt a lot of relief and happy on reaching the motel. I started thinking that everything went off well despite the stupid schedule prepared by the travel agent. Everything worked with clock work precision. No delays, no missed flights. I was lucky. I realized the importance of planning the schedule with a lot of care and cushion.I decided to be careful in future. It was a good lesson.
Next day, I got a reasonable breakfast of juice,toast and coffee. It was a total self service,the items were left in the lobby for us to pickup and eat.First time, I saw people drinking coffee with a straw. I found it burning the tongue and later, the US discarded that practice.
It was January and pretty cold. I managed it. The workshop was for two days. The focus was to prepare an action plan for rural energy programs in developing countries. There were about 20 people attending the workshop.I was the only non US person there with ground level knowledge and exposure.So I was happy. I felt that I could contribute. My worries vanished. I was in my element and contributed a lot to the meeting. 
I talked about the most important problem - improving the efficiency of cooking stoves in order to minimize the consumption of fire wood ,thereby reducing deforestation. I wrote a page for them to include in their final report. I also told them about the magnitude of agro wastes. 
When I used the word 'waste', a person interrupted me and said that India used its wastes. I clarified that ,' yes. We use a lot of waste like straw is used as cattle feed and husk is used for cooking. But we still leave out a lot. The total production was about 200 plus million tons of collectible waste and only a part is usable.' But the point that I wanted to emphasize was that the efficiency of use was low - less than10% and it was possible to increase it to a higher level. We could achieve definitely 20%. I also told them about the smokeless chula used in Mysore and promoted by Gandhi. They all agreed with me. I found most participants knowledgeable about rural problems. So my discussions were understood and appreciated.
Let us continue in the next post
Greetings. Dks
06/12/25, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 916
We had a working lunch and my choices were limited. We could pick up coffee and cookies anytime. So I was comfortable. Prof Krishnan's additional jacket was useful. 
After the day's session, I went to Boston by metro to a departmental store to buy a large VIP suitcase for AKN and some toys for my children. It became a standard practice for me to bring toys from big cities like Delhi, Bombay etc. I bought them and came back. We crossed the Charles river. It was frozen.
We had dinner with the organizer. He made a special veg pasta for me. I didn't drink. 
I talked to two people specifically during dinner. One was Prof Rogers from MIT. He said Prof Vedula, my colleague from the Civil engineering department, IISc, was with him at that time. Another person gave me an invitation - a similar workshop was being held at Smithsonian institution in Washington, that too immediately after this workshop. She wanted me to attend that workshop. That put me in a dilemma. My return tickets were booked and I had to join IIT immediately after return.I said that if she could get me a ticket from Washington to Amsterdam, then I would participate in the second workshop. She agreed. 
I saw another face of technology. She said she would organize prepaid ticket advice -known as PTA-for me. I should go to the check in counter at Logan airport. There, I would get my tickets - Boston to Washington Baltimore airport and another from WB to Amsterdam. So my travel plan got changed.
I completed the second day's workshop successfully talking about bio gas, biomass, briquette making, solar and wind. I bought some apples for my dinner. I did more shopping - more toys- on the way from Harvard to the motel.
As told previously, I brought some eatables for a student at the Boston university, given by his sister, a friend of my wife. Suddenly I remembered that and called him. He asked me whether I could deliver it to him in his university. I said that was difficult. He came at 930pm and picked up the packet without any word of greetings or thanks. I felt pretty upset about his behavior.
I also got a surprise call in the night from Prof Vedula. He invited me to his house for lunch. He suggested that I should check out from the motel, take a cab to his flat and after lunch go to the airport. I liked that clarity and agreed to do so. 
I went to his flat the next day ,spent time with him,had rice ,dhall and veggies for lunch- the first time I had rice- and left for the airport. I went to the check in counter and told the person there about my PTA. She asked for my passport and issued three tickets - one to Washington Baltimore, another from there to Amsterdam by KLM and a third from Amsterdam to Manchester. The first flight was smooth.Surprisingly, the WB airport was not crowded and was shining. I took a cab to the Smithsonian,got a room and went to the meeting venue. It was all easy and fine, no worries.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
07/12/25, 4:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  917
Our food requirements from bf to dinner were taken care of by the Smithsonian. We didn't go out for anything. The outside was cold and frozen. The meeting followed without a break starting at 8am in the morning and going up to 8pm with breaks for lunch and coffee. The workshop was for two days. I left on the second day evening to catch my flight to Amsterdam. I took an earlier flight, but they didn't have a veg meal. I got only an apple and bread along with juice and coffee. Can we think of international flights with no food now?
My entire US trip was filled with anxieties, surprises and twists and it came to an end after five days of stay- a short period. My trip was very fruitful. Everything was easy and people were helpful. They had time for socialization.Even, the immigration and customs officials were friendly and helpful. It was a great trip so far. It is different now. But my surprise was that I didn't retain these contacts. There were no future opportunities for contacting any of them.
I reached Amsterdam in the morning of the next day.I planned to go to Eindhoven, but decided to skip that trip as I didn't have time for that trip. I went around Amsterdam, had pan cakes,and went to a diamond factory. The owner was pleased and welcomed me, a totally different response to an Indian in Europe. I took a ferry. I found people living close to canals and in the lake. They had electricity and water connections. I saw a nice custom. Most houses had three or four floors. Vegetables and grocery were delivered to their door steps. The people living on the higher floors didn't come down to pick up their deliveries. They had a pulley and rope system and they sent an empty basket down and the vendor put the deliveries in the basket. Then the basket was pulled up- effort saving mechanism. 
I see several houses with three floors in Bengaluru,but didn't see such a pulley installed in them. The only guy who doesn't go up the stairs is the morning paper boy who throws them into the balconies. I had seen paper boys struggling to throw paper to third floor balcony in Calcutta in the sixties in my uncle's house. 
I took the night flight to Manchester. I had no visa and didn't inform anyone there. So I didn't know where to stay. The decision was a stupid one. I won't do it now,having learnt the difficulties in life and knowing the importance of planning.
I landed in Manchester,told the immigration that I didn't have a visa,but would be leaving the next day for India. I didn't have tickets either. He allowed me in. I didn't have small change to phone. The immigration guy was so good that he allowed me the use of his phone. I called Narayanan,UMIST. He was available, came and took me home.
I bought a ticket to Bombay from London, left by bus in the night to London. I took the airIndia flight to Bombay and reached Bangalore on 15th Jan.
I met AKN,gave his VIP suitcase, returned Krishnan's jacket, gave a letter in the SA office about my going on leave , and left for Madras by the afternoon Brindavan express. My journey wasn't over. 
I left the next day with my family - my wife and two small kids - by the slowest Madras Bombay mail in first class. We spent two nights in the train and reached Dadar at 5 am.Both my kids were fine in the train, but couldn't eat anything. I managed to get milk and hot water in stations.We went to Cheddanagar to my sister in laws place. I went to IIT and reported for duty in the computer centre. 
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
08/12/25, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 918
I met Mr RD  Kumar first. He took me through all initialization activities. He took me to Prof Isaac. Isaac was happy that I joined there. I joined duty by signing the joining report in his presence. Then Kumar took me to the estate office to get my house keys. I got a flat in staff hostel annexe- flat no21.We went to the annexe ,but I found that there was no connection for power, needed for cooking and geysers. So I met the estate officer. He wasn't helpful. He wrote a letter to the electrical engineer,a stupid activity writing to a subordinate in the office. I met Mr Rakshit,the electrical engineer. He got the connection done. Then I came back andmet the faculty in the centre. I got an office in the first floor. The first floor is common to both computer centre on one side and mathematics on the opposite side. We were four professors and Kumar in one wing. Later I went to the main building and met the director. We had a good meeting. I wasn't impressed by the director, may be I was biased with comparisons with Prof Dhawan.
I brought my family from Cheddanagar the next day and we were helped to settle down by Kumar and his wife. My household items sent from Bangalore had arrived. They were in Prof Hariharan's house. I got them transported. So the cots were ready for use. We had an electric stove used for cooking. I was told that it would take more than 3 months to get gas. 
I had met Mr Desai,director, Bharat petroleum in Bangalore before. So I went and met him. He immediately arranged a gas connection. So within a few days, we got a gas connection with a new gas stove.We started getting milk daily and groceries from the nadar shop in the road outside. A boy would pick our orders in the morning and deliver in the afternoon, a very helpful service common to Bombay.The staff hostel was quite far,about half km from the gate. The children were comfortable in the new surroundings. They weathered the travel well.
I was happy with my new environment, had good interactions with my colleagues and office staff,started teaching the operating systems course. I knew Hariharan well and met most faculty members in the EE department. I attended the EE faculty meeting also. I met several other faculty members and got not only adjusted to the system, but also became a part of it. I got into several committees and was welcomed by all. I started a good daily routine - morning walks - a fairly long route inside and by the lake side ,lectures, library work, discussions, tea with colleagues etc. I walked to the department and library was close by.Initially, the climate was good in January and February , but by march end, it became hot. 
AKN came with the energy survey questionnaires in a box and left those papers with me.But I couldn't process them at IIT. My association with PSTI continued and my first visit to PSTI happened in March 1978. I stayed in a small hotel in seshadripuram for two days.
I had discussions with AKN and agreed to spend the month of May in Bangalore. I went to Calcutta with Isaac for the CSI convention in March along with a few students. 
I had a new experience of the examination procedure at IIT.It was very different from the procedure at IISc. In IISc, you conducted the exam independently and you choose the method of examination and conduct it where ever you want. 
But here, there is a defined procedure. I had to go at 7am on the day of the examination of my course, get my question paper typed, copied and sealed. I picked up the question paper before the start of the exam. The exams were conducted in the large convo hall. The convo hall was used for many activities - exams, convocation, weekly movies mostly Hindi ones, and conferences.
Greetings. Dks
09/12/25, 5:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    919
“In the end, it's not the years in your life that count. It's the life in your years.”
Abraham Lincoln
I wanted to get a ration card. I found it easy. I went to the municipal office in Vikhroli and was given a form. The form was in Marathi. The lady in the counter filled it up for me. I got the ration card in a weeks time - a straight forward process, no bribes. I liked it.
But I found that times have changed. I used the card to buy sugar and rice in 1973 immediately after marriage. The shop was close by in 13th cross and the secretary was an IISc employee named Mr Hanuman.I wasn't keen on buying and using kerosene even though I experimented with three four stoves. After returning from Manchester in 1975, I bought rice from the open market and stopped buying it from the fair price shop. I bought only sugar from the rations. 
Now a major change has happened. We had a big political transformation in 1977. The Janata party came to power. Mr HM Patel became the finance minister and he abolished control on sugar in march 1978. A simple act transformed the market. Sugar for the first time was available on the open market at near the ration prices. So I didn't find any use for the ration card.
I saw several changes in life in Bangalore and Bombay. 
People in Bangalore take life easy. But people are active ,busy and running in Bombay. So your normal requirements get done fast, the best examples were getting the gas connection and the ration card.Most services were attended to promptly.
Travel in Bombay was easy. You took the BEST bus to Vikhroli or Ghatkopar from Powai and took the local. Buses had good schedules with low wait times. Even though I had to take a bus and train to most places, it wasn't burdensome. Locals were the lifeline for millions of commuters. So you didn't feel the distance. Autos were available in most suburban stations for short distance rides. Travel in Bombay wasn't difficult or worrisome. People believed in organization. They line up in a bus stand or taxi stand to get into a bus or taxi.
Travel in Bangalore was and is a night mare. Buses, you don't get them even after waiting for a long time. Buses were packed most of the time and there was a scramble to get into a bus- not a pleasant or easy task. Auto drivers were notorious, unhelpful and uncooperative. There were no suburban trains. The situation is worse even today - even your own cars can't take you to many parts of the city in defined times. The excuse,"I got delayed due to traffic" is a common one heard everywhere in Bangalore.
There is a very large gap in the shopping activity. Bangalore wasn't known for big shops in all areas in the 60s and 70s. We needed to go to majestic or commercial street to get clothes and tailor services. You had to go to the city market area-SJP road- for electrical items. Only in the 80s ,shopping in many areas like Malleswaram improved. But that wasn't the case with Bombay. Abundance is the term I use to describe Bombay. Even Madras was better than Bangalore. Delhi beats all cities in shopping.
Bombay had a great electricity distribution system despite being handled by three agencies- Tatas for supply, BEST for distribution in the south and Bombay Suburban for distribution in the north. The coordination was good. There was futuristic planning and power shortages ,power cuts and power failures were rare. It is heaven compared to Bangalore and Delhi. 
Bombay was a land of surplus not just in materials and resources but in thinking also. Bangalore is a city of scarcity of thinking. Bangalore suffers from a very big disease - mental poverty. Houses in the 60s and 70s had 8 by 6 feet bed rooms, even some hotels. Physical problems like water scarcity, poor electric supply and worst public transport- existing for several decades-are evidence of mental poverty - no vision, poor planning,extension approaches dominate city rulers.
Still I was attached to Bangalore. I felt Bangalore to be my home. I love Bangalore. While I was a bombay man in IIT, I embrased not just Bangalore but the entire Karnataka in the years to come. My attachment proved useful later. 
Greetings. Dks
10/12/25, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  920
I was to spend a month at ASTRA during May 1978. So we left by Bombay mail to Chennai and after a day's stay there came to Bangalore. I found this route more convenient for my children.We got an apartment in the students block ,Dr Narain Mahishi was living in another apartment then. I got food from C mess.
I got a working office in KSCST and also visited my office in the school of automation regularly. My focus was on the analysis of our survey on energy use in villages.
One other task was my commitment to Prof Dhawan to inform him my decision whether I will return or continue at IIT. I decided to return to Bangalore by April may 1979. I wrote a long letter to Prof Dhawan on my reasons to return to IISc and my final decision to return. The letter led to an interesting conversation with AKN. I had written in the first part of that letter that I like IIT Bombay very much, l like the department and had many colleagues ,I had great opportunities,and most people like my wok etc,about my life at IIT
 AKN asked me what is the need for that part. I said that I want to state that despite a great life, I want to return and I also indicated indirectly that I wanted to return because of ASTRA and not because of computer research. He got convinced.I sent the letter by mid May 78. 
One ME student from EE met me and wanted to do his project work with me. I suggested to him a project on building an agricultural data base system using relational model. We didn't have any relational database available in India at that time.Our DEC1090 had a network DBMS. So it was a pioneering development work. It was both an enquiry based system and a transactional system. I was the first in the country to start work on relational database and online transactions processing.
It was a very fortunate thing to have sent the letter. Prof Dhawan enquired with Prof BSR about my promotion. Prof BSR said he had kept my papers pending without processing. Dhawan got upset and told him to process my papers. So my letter speeded up the processing of my promotion process. 
We returned to Bombay on first June following the same route via Chennai. As soon as we were back, I got my original allotted quarters -BTR. It was close to the main gate and lake side and schools. We shifted within a week. It was quite comfortable with a huge hall, a well done study, two bed rooms and a kitchen and a lot of open space. We had very good neighbors. Our neighbor Ratna Singh was helpful. My wife had a problem talking to his very friendly and affectionate wife in Hindi.our other neighbors spoke Kannada,Marathi,Hindi and Tamil. My daughter found a girl of her age and played with her.My colleague,Prof Mehndiratta lived in BTR. So I used to go on his scooter to the department some days. I didn't open the dining table. The table was in its original packed state till I returned.So we got settled fast here.
I had to admit my daughter to the LKG. They wanted a birth certificate from the municipality. I requested my cousin, Shankar - unfortunately he is no more in this world now and I miss him a lot- to get the birth certificate. It took a Himalayan effort for him to get it. I wanted to know an alternate. The school asked me to sign a sworn affidavit. So I got an affidavit typed, went to Vikhroli court, got it signed by a judge and came back for lunch- all done in half a day.I couldn't dream of such speed in Bangalore. With that affidavit,my daughter got admissions in LKG.
My daughter found the school difficult as everyone spoke Hindi. They had two sections and the teacher in the other section knew Tamil. Kumar suggested that I should request a transfer. I tried my best including talking to the director. I didn't succeed. My daughter continued and picked up some Hindi words. She became comfortable with the school.
Greetings. Dks
11/12/25, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 921
I met many faculty members in different departments in IIT. The diversity of faculty was lot more than IISc. At that time,IISc had a large percentage of south Indian population,but IIT had many people from north,east and Maharashtra in addition to south.So you see different cultures. Most even Maharashtrians spoke in Bombay Hindi- a comfortable language.
I met Prof Pandalai,ex director of IIT madras in Prof Panicker's house.I met Prof Anil Date. We had common interests in rural technologies. We had many discussions. But most faculty, including the director, saw a red herring in rural technologies. They had a misgiving that this emphasis would take us backward. I also felt that this would lead to confused thinking. But I realized many things by then. My learnings are
1.There is no such thing as rural technologies.Our focus in ASTRA was on development of rural technologies. I felt we should focus on technology adaption and absorption more than technology modification according to our perceptions.We saw a state in which villagers were living. We wanted to build technologies to suit that state. 
2.Instead, we should see how we could change that state leading to a better living - ease of work- better cooking, better yields, better housing,better lighting etc. So ASTRA focus was correct but thinking was wrong.
3.The idea of modifying implements to suit the current state as propagated through the student projects of KSCST was wrong. We needed more serious involvement and much better understanding of the conditions for technology adaptations. Engineers and engineering missed this crucial aspect. That reminds me the book "two cultures" by CP Snow.
4.We can't stop the march of technologies, we can only delay them. Despite all clarity and understanding that existed with AKN, he realised this aspect later, moved away from ASTRA and rural technologies  and he took to MS office later and looked at management of electrical energy. I saw a total change. That started the decelerating phase of ASTRA and they changed their name. 
5.Most researchers focus on improving a technology or a solution , but forget about the multiple aspects of technology conversions, usage and adaptation. I talked about identifying problems in real life and finding solutions. ASTRA while hoping to address this aspect of source level understanding , imposed its perceptions of technology. If we concentrated on identifying source level gaps, it would have taken us farther. Every engineering discipline should address this. I feel engineering has moved away from the users.The area of control system evolved by addressing the problems of quality in manufacturing. Fortunately,IT is forced to build systems for use by people, services and industries. 
But I saw IIT embarking on a big experiment. It set up a centre of studies in resources engineering. This was bigger than ASTRA. It had academics from several disciplines and practicing experts from forests,agriculture,geology and soils. The emphasis was on a lot of field work in Chandrapur district forests. So it was really a study project with the aim of generating primary data and developing a deeper understanding of not only people but also the geology, soils and forests.I liked the aims of CSRE,but I was not clear of any role for me there except secondary roles of discussions ,selection of faculty . I wrote a paper and presented it at their first major conference.
I met Prof Mallikarjun,the chair of CSRE several times. He was an alumnus of IISc from the metallurgy department. But he didn't have any idea of the future course of CSRE.
In addition ,I met many faculty members in several departments. Most were helpful. I could jell with most very well. Prof Ramesh, father of Jairam Ramesh, was a neighbor.
So life moved smoothly and briskly at IIT.
Greetings. Dks
12/12/25, 4:15 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 922
Prof Karunakara has a query:
"Dear sir,It is feeling that we are making journey along with you. As each institute has its own culture, how you managed it? Was there no conflicts? Thanks and regards"
My response
You are right. Whenever we go to another organization, we should first learn the practices happening therw, understand them ,adjust to them and become part of that institution. The proof happens when you are accepted as one of them. 
When I came to IISc, I was in a totally different world ,very different from my exposures. 
My world view enlarged. I learnt many languages. I was trying to understand multi Indian cultures across various states.
I saw many differences at IISc and needed a large scale learnings and adjustments.
The course starts right earnest from day one. You get a shock of tests in the third week itself. You are busy reading books in the library,doing assignments and solving tough problems. Everything was hard - language,teaching methods,exam, evaluations, reading culture ,work culture etc. I had seen a few students breaking down and leaving the institute.
My visits to TIFR for computer work exposed me to a totally different - intellectually intensive and collaborative- work culture. I had opportunities to network with computer users from academic institutions from Bombay,Bangalore and Calcutta and from several industries and utilities.
Then when I moved to Manchester university, I was in a foreign country and the culture was different. Again, I had to learn,accept and adapt to that culture. This was tougher.I also spent six months at UMIST. I learnt a lot of new things - how do students do project work? How is a PhD thesis evaluated? How do they teach? etc.
Then I moved to IIT Bombay. I quickly learnt the culture at IIT. There was a different aspect I needed to learn. While there were differences in academics, they can be adopted without difficulty. I discussed conducting exams. I saw a difference in project work evaluation. I saw several differences in administration of the department, estate office and main office. Leave rules were different. But I needed to be accepted by others as one of their own and not an outsider. I networked with many faculty members- close to 100 plus- and got into the IIT culture.
One reason I found in IISc why some new faculty took more to adjust was that they compared an IISc practice with the practice in their earlier institution- I found this prominent with those who came from IIT Kanpur- and keep criticising IISc. They couldn't adjust to IISc. I avoided this comparison. I wont talk about IISc unless some one asks for it. I explained in the senate about our practices and it wasn't mistaken. 
This was only a beginning. I moved into the secretariat of karnataka government later. The adjustment wasn't easy then. Later I taught at IIM Bangalore, AIT Bangkok and many universities and institutions. So my life was full of adaptations proving Darwins theory of success. 
One simple learning is
Understand people, be friendly and helpful, don't criticize, don't have value judgements.
That is the explanation
Thanks Karunakara
Greetings. Dks
12/12/25, 5:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: https://dksubra.blogspot.com/2025/12/accelerators-for-green-economy.html
13/12/25, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 923
After returning from Bangalore,I got involved in academic activities fully. I did write more than 10 papers during my stay at IIT. I attended conferences at several universities. I visited Delhi university and gave a talk on multi dimensional non linear optimization amidst many mathematicians. It was received well. I visited Jadavpur university ,Calcutta, Benares Hindu University ,Andhra University,Pune university and gave invited talks in conferences. I saw how universities were working. I gave a keynote at two CSI conferences- one at Calcutta and another at Bangalore, presented two papers at the Institution of Engineers ,gave a talk at an IEEE seminar on digital control systems and a paper on information and databases for resources at CSRE conference. So it was a productive year.
These visits were great experiences for me. I saw many cities  like Benares, Vishakapatnam, observed different cultures and got a much better perspective of India. The more important aspect was a great networking with academics and understanding the opinions of a highly diverse group of academics. Jadavpur had a good computer culture and the university housed a regional computer centre and I visited that centre.My friendship with Prof Radhakrishna murthy and Prof Raju of Andhra university continued for many years. I was glad that the computer science department was doing well and was way ahead of many universities.
I had a good experience of getting involved in social issues. There were many groups discussing many topics in IIT. I participated in some. One was about BHEL, and another was on nuclear power.
Greetings
Dks
14/12/25, 5:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 924
I had a feeling that most academics are comfortable in their chair and don't want to stick their neck out even when it may concern them. The BHEL problem that exploded in 1978 was to me an important one. Gandhi talked about village independence ,economy and swadeshi. So it instilled a belief in me that dependence on  imports will not solve the country's economic and developmental problems. This is a perennial problem with divided opinions. Our first PM,Nehru talked about self reliance and self sufficiency,but his soviet model failed.
Let me discuss the BHEL problem. It started as internal politics and personal egos. In consequence,it led to the import of power equipment from foreign companies for the first time in the country away from BHEL. It involved power struggles between DrA Gopalakrishnan,I think son in law of Dr KL Rao, and Balakrishnan,ED. Gopalakrishnan,a renowned nuclear scientist was invited to come and head the R and D unit. The R and D unit became a football tossed amongst places. Dr Gopalakrishnan,being unhappy, started a failure analysis unit inside the R and D at Hyderabad and their findings criticized BHEL products.I felt that If there were defects, they should be discussed and rectified internally instead of open accusations. It was unfortunate,and it opened the gates for imports. 
Till then, BHEL had a formidable reputation for producing a variety of power equipment - boilers, turbines,generators,transformers, switch gear etc.It had been doing a great job in building most power plants in the country. 
I had many connections with BHEL. I knew its first MD, Mr Swayambhu, and met him a few times.He was the first director of CPRI. He always thought of improving the production and introducing new technologies. He showed a keen interest in power electronics.He set up a separate research institute. I got my first job with that institute.
So what was my opinion on this import aspect which would destroy BHEL?
When I was doing the second year engineering in 1960, I had a discussion with the principal,Prof Natesan. I saw a lot of small motors and asked him why we were importing thousands of fractional hp electric motors and why couldn't we manufacture them in India? He said that it was a tragedy. We even imported watches then. HMT was yet to begin manufacturing. I felt strongly about planning a manufacturing infra in the country in order to reduce imports. So later, I appreciated Indian manufacturing when I joined the Easun group and saw their efforts in manufacturing transformers, switch gear and relays. This opinion got strengthened when I saw BEL,HAL,HMT in Bangalore and I was happy. 
I felt that it was a tragedy to destroy a great and highly productive and useful organization through petty quarrels. We killed the machine tool sector starting with the killing of the heavy engineering corporation,Ranchi. Personal egos should not destroy an organization. So I spoke strongly in that meeting that we should oppose the move by the government to import power equipment from abroad. Later on in the nineties ,I was involved with two failure problems, one dealing with BHEL switch gear failure resulting in large financial losses to KPC.
Today, I am glad that BHEL is still there and still supplying most of the power equipment required in India. There are only a few public sector companies surviving in India and BHEL is one.
I talked about government supporting imports against local products of BHEL. This confusion was started by Nehru. He talked of self sufficiency, but prevented the Indian private sector from manufacturing through his license permit mechanisms. That introduced corruption and crony capitalism. Till mid eighties, imports were allowed partially but local production was curtailed. But the urge to import continued to exist even. Narasimha Rao opened the doors for imports while removing the permit license policies. India's production started reducing leading to the death of many big companies like HMT, Kirloskar etc. Imports are exploding now. So don't blame Nehru alone. It is in our colonial mind set- west is the best.We import a lot from China now. Idealism has no meaning with our governments. When will we learn? PM Modi brought in the make in India concept.Does Atmanirbar have any meaning when all electronics goods are imported from china despite knowing their dangers.
Greetings. Dks
15/12/25, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 925
We saw several prime ministers in the country bringing in social reforms. But the reforms in the economy are not easy to for big bang. Many variables are there, like technology,skills, motivation, needs, pushes,market and policies. But we miss the underlying factors- competencies to produce/manufacture, physical infrastructure to distribute, communications to collaborate, futuristic thinking to move forward , controls ,flexibility, convictions and beliefs. I assumed that macro economic theory will address these basic requirements for the development of a country. Unfortunately, we are dogmatic and not practical, we are ignorant and not very knowledgeable, we are diffused in our thinking and not focused, we are emotional and not clinical, we believe in and are attached to past cultures and we change slowly many years after the need for a change arose. It will surprise us that organizations follow a rigid, static rule based, centralized top heavy governance system. It was acceptable for the early 20th century, but is obsolete for the uncertain, volatile and complex 21st century. But most organizations don't bother and stay in the 20th century mindset. They corrupt the 21st century kids. So our self reliance and atmanirbar as well as swatcha Bharat are struggling. 
I attended the Economists conference inaugurated by Mr Morarji Desai,our PM at that time. He and Mr Jag Jivan Ram landed at IIT. He walked briskly and went and sat in the front without any big protocol.He was a very simple person. Jag Jivan Ram had to be carried to the dais and it took 10 minutes and the PM was waiting patiently. I liked Morarji's energy and simplicity. His speech was short and strong without platitudes. 
I want to touch upon the faith of most planners and economists today - the total belief in market economy, market corrections,profit motives. Despite the government coming up with mandatory CSR, most industry or commerce units don't believe in it. They treat it like a tax without any involvement.
One of my major achievements at IIT was producing a well balanced - theory, hardware and software- computer science curriculum for the MTech program. While, most young faculty were enthusiastic and motivated and involved in research activities, I was surprised at the situation. Most concentrated on their area and didn't show a holistic approach to computer science, each knowing about his area only. So a balanced ,holistic view of computer science and algorithmic thinking- I consider that an important attribute of a CS student- were missing in them. Most faculty didn't show interest in data and algorithms. They thought that both were peripheral areas in CS. Except Sarda, none was working in a modern area. Futuristic vision was absent. I was always on the lookout for the latest developments, got into new areas of research and had a good knowledge and teaching exposure in many broad areas of CS. So I found these lacunae not acceptable. But they cooperated with us and agreed to a new curriculum. Prof Kekre didn't have any role there.We pushed the new curriculum through the senate easily. I defended the curriculum and removed the perception prevalent amongst many professors that CS is a part of EE- electrical engineering. Everyone appreciated my talk and i was happy that we started June 1978 with the new curriculum. I started teaching data structures and operating systems.
Greetings. Dks
16/12/25, 4:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 926
Let me continue with my IIT Bombay activities in 1978. I became a member of PGPC- a committee that governs the functioning of graduate programs in IIT. The committee looked at curriculum development and conduct of courses in the entire institute. The Departmental program committee managed the curriculum at the department level. IITs follow this structure. In IISc we had a senate curriculum committee and departmental committees managing the programs. In all such cases, the senate gives the approval in the end. At IISc ,we have faculties - one for science and another for engineering- looking after the programs.
It is a good point to discuss one essential component of higher education- academic governance. It is a well developed area,but ignored by most and misunderstood by many.
The first problem is we don't know the differences between three terms applied with respect to the working of the organizations and governments- administration, management and governance. Governance is normally a set of objectives and another set of principles, organizational structures and procedures. Initially the focus was on stability and order. Then we introduced fairness, openness, transparency into governance. Then we looked at non centralized or distributed participative governance providing satisfaction to all. Now the focus is adaptation to the future with minimum time lapse- instead of waiting for the future events, create them.
Every high quality institution was concerned about the quality, modernness and relevance of the curriculum - both the framework and contents- followed by it, about changing them every year and also about evaluations. It should have a mechanism for resolving disputes and grievances. It should be seen as fair. That is academic governance. Unfortunately, that is centralized in universities and most functions are ritualistic or absent. All universities concentrate on exams ,not on a modern curriculum, a good teaching process and a better knowledge transfer mechanism. Our science education degraded because of the poor governance at the universities.
But it is the focus of life in IITs and IISc. 
I want to talk about the power of academic governance at IITB by explaining an incident that happened in 1978. 
A faculty member in the Mechanical engineering department was dismissed citing negligence in duties. Ramanna was the chairman of the board of governors and refused to discuss the case. The faculty threatened to go on strike - while they will do routine teaching and research, they won't do any admin or other work including setting up and evaluating JEE papers. So IIT yielded. The enquiry committee exonerated the dismissed faculty and he was reinstated. That is the power of good principles of governance.
We had some visitors while living in Bombay. My uncle Sankaran visited us and spent a few days. We visited the Mahalakshmi temple with them. Mr Thimme Gowda came and spent a few days in Bombay. He stayed in the city. He had consultations with an ENT specialist. I went with him to the consultant. He suggested minor surgery. After discussions, Mr Gowda decided not to undergo surgery. We visited a wholesale textiles shop and bought some sarries at a low rate. I was taken aback with the volume and variety - thousands of items in a single place.
Dr Deekshatulu came for a PhD oral. 
Let me talk about another learning about project work evaluation next.
Greetings
Dks
17/12/25, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 927
IIT had a good evaluation mechanism for the project work of its MTech students. A year is divided into segments and at each segment, one aspect of progress by students is reviewed by three faculty members. The expectation of the first review done at the end of one month was to see whether 
1.the student has defined the problem well , in detail, the motives and deliverables defined, literature work done, resources required and available, difficulties etc.
2.the project work is feasible .
3.the student gives an action plan - the next stages, ways or methods of going ahead with each phase, timelines . 
The students provide a write up before the presentation. Most faculty read the reports before coming for the presentation. I appreciated their commitment to quality and seriousness to the students' work. They didn't say that it is the faculty supervisor's responsibility. The committee functioned not as an evaluation team,but as a guidance team in addition to helping in the evaluation. This system is very different from the IISc system. In IISc, there is only one final evaluation. The total responsibility is with the supervisor,who also plays a big role in the award of the final grade. If you let one person direct a project, it will have one view- the view of the supervisor. But in the case of IIT, a student get multiple inputs based on three views. That is good. Most practical problems have many solutions and many approaches for solutions using many technologies. So the IIT model opens the minds of students to these multiple paths.
The second review was to see their preparation, their plan and design work. The third review looks at the progress of implementation and experiments to be carried out. Then the final evaluation happens to award grades.
I thought it was a good system. That is the reason we use this system to direct the shortlisted proposals towards a successful completion in the FAER scholar program.
I had a previous experience on project work at UMIST where students should have a notebook which lists discussions with the supervisor by the student. The student should note down actions to be done and compliances. That was another good idea. 
These approaches make evaluation rational and justifiable, like the concept of continuous evaluation of course work. 
It is important to tell students that project work is not a free for all activity. It is a structured process having many steps and good documentation and good plans for action. It is not just to rig up a circuit and make it work. It is a training to solve a problem end to end in a professional manner.
Greetings
Dks
18/12/25, 4:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 928
I was invited for a keynote for the CSI annual convention in 1979 at Bangalore. I came to Bangalore in Jan 1979 for the talk. Isaac wasn't happy with the topic chosen by me - it was given by the organizers. The topic was computer controlled power systems. He didn't come. 
Surprisingly , I was seeing a trend in CSI- lesser involvement by academics. Initially when the computer society was set up with Prof R Narasimhan as the first president, many academics and researchers were happy and participated in CSI activities. When Prof RN handed over the presidentship to Mr FC Kohli, many weren't happy. Unlike the Institution of Engineers, the computer society started looking at business activities more, the reason being the number of academics was less and more business people became members. Initial years saw participation by faculty and students from IITs.
Actually many from IITs stopped attending the CSI conventions.  That was because of the bigger focus on business , technologies , exhibitions that became the hall mark of CSI. But I attended the conventions till the mid nineties. Why?
The exhibition told us about the latest developments in the computer area. We became aware of what is happening in the CS area on the developments and manufacturing side. It was very useful for me to advise industries. Some international companies exhibited their products.
Secondly,I saw how businesses were adopting computers in their operations. It was painfully slow.
Thirdly, I had an opportunity to talk about the latest developments. I gave a talk introducing databases. I saw again how people and experts rejected data bases. They said the database operations are slower compared to file systems. Most had invested heavily in file systems and didn't want to change. So there was an all round attack on databases and this continued for the next five plus years. I ran several tutorials in CSI conventions and introduced many new areas.
Fourthly, I liked the opportunity to move with business leaders to know their views. That gave me a totally different perception, away from academic understanding. I spent the sixties and early seventies attending the CBIP conferences and met many chairmen and chief engineers of electricity boards. I knew their views and it was disappointing, but a few understood my talks. I found one leadership trait in those meetings.These leaders may not understand or partially understand what one is talking, but they form an opinion based on audience response. Their perception is derived and intuitive. I found the business heads better in CSI. Some were well educated and most were well trained. So discussions were better. That revealed an important fact to me that ownership and responsibility gave better leadership than the seniority based leadership of electricity boards. That is why railways in the public sector succeeded compared to electricity and water boards also in the public sector, which are still not doing well. 
I met NV from the department. He told me that I was promoted in the December council meeting. Surprisingly, I was neither happy or elated. I expected it. So it wasn't a surprise. My return was now confirmed. 
Greetings
Dks
19/12/25, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   929
After CSI convention, I went to the department. I met most. The group of professors were going for coffee. They called me to join them. I hesitated a bit. Prof MRC said ,"anyway you are a professor and so you can join us."I went with them for coffee.I met AKN also and discussed actions after my return from IIT.
After returning from Bangalore after CSI, I had a major worry. 
I am basically a multidimensional person. So I weighed the good aspects of IIT.I liked IIT,its culture, faculty, computer centre and I had a lot of friends. We had no tension, no problems that couldn't be solved. Many friends like Kumar, Prof Hariharan, Prof Mallikarjun,Mrs Ratna Singh,Mrs Narayana murthy, to name a few helped us at every stage. Kumar was highly knowledgeable and knew whom to approach and how to solve my problems. We also had some relatives like ABL, Venkitachalam,Mrs Valli,my aunt in Bombay. The quarters were good , lot of space indoors and outdoors. There was no problems with water and power. There was a lot of walking space. Purchases were easy.So we got attached to city and IIT.
Let me narrate an incident that gives an indication of IITs general opinion of me. During my visit to Jadavpur university- this time I traveled by Gitanjali express, the fastest train to Howrah from VT,now renamed CST-, I gave my talk and started discussing with their faculty. I found most were sincere and keen to gain more knowledge. That was very different from other places including some IITs. The faculty took me to the regional computer centre and I had a lot of discussions with the director. After return to Powai, I was talking to the dean about the regional computer centre at Jadavpur. He got a different idea. Many senior faculty  in IIT were unhappy with the totally inadequate and poor computer facility. They felt that it hampered their research work. I supported their thinking about getting a better computer. So the dean was excited. He thought that he could use me to achieve the objective of getting a new computer. He asked me to give a note. I sent a note. But Isaac wasn't happy. He liked the Russia made computers despite their poor quality.So I didn't go further on that front even though I felt strongly that IIT research was suffering seriously. TIFR facility gave a lot of relief.
Already there was a talk that Isaac might give way to me as the head of the centre. That talk was not comforting for me. It was distressing. I didn't want to be accused of usurping his position. He spent a lot of time to build the centre and was a part and parcel of the centre. I had a lot of respect for him.So I won't be happy to replace him. I would also antagonise Prof Kekre,a senior. 
To show how careful I was to get accepted by the department faculty, let me explain my relationship with Kumar. It was a close one. He helped me throughout my stay at IIT Powai. Without him, I would be lost. When he was in Manchester, I used to discuss his research work regularly with him. He had registered for PhD at IIT with Prof Kekre. I knew his close friendship with Kekre. So I decided not to discuss his research activities, as I felt that I would become an intruder. That was my advance thinking. Actually, I wasn't shooting my mouth at IIT whenever I talked to another faculty member. I had seen the impacts of my statements several times. People - most faculty I met with- liked me and respected me. So I should behave with maturity. I became a thinking,learning, observant,responsible and mature person at a very young age under the training of my uncle.
So I was thinking about breaking the news of my return to IISc and was feeling that it wasn't a happy statement. I felt miserable. I delayed it for some more time.  
We found that our daughter had short sight. I took her for an exam by an ophthalmologist. He prescribed glasses for her.
I bought a tricycle. This tricycle,a good and sturdy one, gave me some small pin pricks while traveling. I bought it and brought it home by the local train to Vikhroli. I was fined at Vikhroli station for not paying luggage charges. 
In BTR quarters , the hall was big. I thought my daughter could learn to cycle there. But I got a surprise. My son took to cycling. He was short,still he monkey pedaled and learnt to cycle. He enjoyed cycling. I was happy and discovered his energy. I discovered his curiosity when we were staying in the quarters at IISc during May,1978. He tried to put his finger inside a plug point and got a shock. He started crying.He was courageous,may be foolhardy, but was also timid many times. He would mimic my daughter's responses and fear. At IIT, he was growing up,but was feeling lonely after my daughter started going to LKG.So the cycle gave him a job to do. Kumar saw him cycling and commented that I didn't put up the dining table as it would have obstructed my son from cycling.
Greetings
Dks
20/12/25, 4:01 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 930
I decided to wait for sometime to inform the director about my leaving IIT. I decided that my daughter should complete her LKG and we should move after that. I was teaching a course and I needed to complete the course. But I should join IISc by January 1979 as I would be completing a year of leave by then. So i wrote a letter to Prof Dhawan that I had teaching commitments and needed permission to join later. 
I informed IIT director first. He was upset. Then I informed Prof Isaac and the department faculty.Some were unhappy. Dr R Balasubramanian, who was my BE teacher and project supervisor, had returned from Moscow after spending several years doing PhD. As a professor attached to EE department also,I was invited to his promotion interview. I excused myself saying he was my teacher. He became an assistant professor and came home and met us. 
Since I was teaching a course ,I told the director that I would continue till April end . He agreed. I informed Mr Govindarao who was staying in my house my decision to return to Bangalore. He promptly found a house close by in subramanyanagar and vacated my house. I came alone in the first week of March 79 and rejoined the school of automation. I brought some luggage with me. PSTI sent their van to pick me. I came via Miraj and got down at yeshwantpur , went and joined the department and went by the van to the city station to pick up my luggage from the break van. I then moved into my flat.
I stayed for a day,applied for leave and returned to Bombay. I completed my course ,was given a farewell by students. My daughter completed her LKG.Then it was a hectic time to return two gas connections, pack our big items and send them by truck and pack our things .Then we left by Madras mail as usual. I paid luggage charges. Still I was harassed at Madras Central station. After a day at my parents house,we returned to Bangalore.
My routine started. It was hectic.
Let me ruminate on my IIT experience. 
It was good overall . I was happy with my stay. I knew India better,got adjusted easily to another institution,made many friends, got an exposure to visit several universities in the country.I saw computer science programs at many universities and had a balanced exposure to the state of computer science in the country.
I liked the CSRE experiment.
On the flip side, the visit was financially a disaster. I had to spend money on transport and travels.So I lost a few thousands of rupees in the year.
Research culture at IIT was at a lower level compared to IISc. There was no excitement. I used to talk to many colleagues in other departments about research at IISc. That stimulant was missing.
Another aspect I missed was the interactions with outside experts. IISc normally gets many visitors in a year and we organize a large number of lectures by visitors and experts. We also had many seminars and institute lectures by academics and industrialists. I missed all these. These interactions provided learning and participation.
Similarly,I missed my ASTRA work and my research in the new area of energy.
Greetings. Dks
21/12/25, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 931
Vinod Vyasulu
"DKS, it may be helpful if you explain how academic ranks like asst prof, assoc prof in IIT/IISc/IIM differ from the UGC system."
My response
Till the second pay commission, salary scales varied amongst states and central salaries were higher.Both designations and salary levels were different for college faculty and university faculty. Some states had several cadres like assistant lecturer, associate lecturer, reader, associate professor etc.
Till the second pay commission, IITs,IISc and IIMs followed central government class1 officers grades with lecturer salary starting at class 1 first level. Till 1967, there was no DA. Government of india started DA with third pay commission and linked it with price index. That was a big boon for people. States followed it after a time delay and state DA didn't match central DA. For instance when I joined the government of karnataka, my salary was protected . But within six or seven months, central DA went up, and all IAS and IPS officers got central DA and I didn't. So my salary, which was matched with my IISc salary when I joined, got reduced to a lower amount and I was losing money every month. That shows the power of DA. It becomes over a period of time almost equal to the basic pay. 
Fourth pay commission decided to bring in UGC scales within its ambit and it had a separate committee to decide on faculty salary. So the basic salary levels of IISc,IITs,IIM as well as UGC pay scales were made the same. 
One important impact of the fourth pay commission was the good hike in pay scales. For the first time, most could live comfortably, buy appliances and save money. This wasn't easy with our salaries till the end of the third pay commission. It is my personal experience. I started breathing easy and didn't worry about shortage of cash to pay for some requisites. Actually ,I bought a godrej refrigerator in 1980 and a color TV in 1984. I bought a washing machine much later in the early nineties.I added a lot of furniture from 1980 onwards. My first car came in the nineties with a loan from IISc.
Unfortunately , I feel this committee made a big mistake in removing the lecturer's position and making assistant professor as the entry grade.PhD was the minimum requirement for selection. Most institutions couldn't get eligible candidates for the faculty position. So the eligibility clause was watered down. That affected the general quality of academics.
But as I said, the DA made the difference. The other major advantage was housing provided by IITs,IIMs and IISc. 
Normally, these decisions have long term impacts. But the pay commissions looked for ease of implementation.
So to conclude, there is a marginal difference in salary levels at most institutions. Faculty in NITs get the same salary and facilities like those in IITs. But quality of research?
Greetings. Dks
22/12/25, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  932
Let me return to 1979. On my return to IISc , I got immersed in activities and quickly filled my plate with many types and areas of work. It filled up faster than my expectations.I involved myself in several activities. 
From childhood, I have been a multidimensional person focusing on many areas and many activities. I walked on the paths of Mathematics, Sciences, four languages, literature,religious studies together during my school time. While I loved mathematics , I also loved other subjects and hated none and no favorites.
First, I found some changes in the institute and city. Prof Ramaseshan, as joint director, was making changes. There were many complaints about the library. The librarian went ahead and acquired many books for the library without consulting departments and it wasn't liked by most faculty.Having been in the institute for more than ten years, he didn't understand the institute ethos. He was a man who thought of himself highly. He felt this job inferior to his earlier job in Chicago. He antagonized a lot of faculty. He was a close friend of mine. To his credit, I should say he was forward looking and wanted to change the working style, but didn't get support from his staff. The library wasn't bad but the image was ruined .Small problems were magnified. That is an important lesson for those who wanted to lead a team or department. Don't rush into the system like a bull without knowing the depth of your unit. Remember the proverb " Fools rush in where angels fear to tread’. The idea is that it is silly to become involved in a situation that you do not understand or are not equipped to deal with, and that a wiser person would hold back.
So the first task is to understand your system, people ,working conditions. The second is to know the problems ,resources, procedures etc. The third is to take your colleagues with you. Gain their confidence. Don't belittle them publicly. Discuss your ideas with them and convince them. The fourth is to build a positive,happy working environment. 
So Prof Ramaseshan revamped the library by setting up an executive committee and removing the librarian from running the library.
 His next attention was on the inefficient running of our computer centre. He roped me in that worrysome problem. The staff didn't know how to manage a time sharing system. Also,DEC10 was not intended for about 700 users in timesharing mode. It wasn't performance tested for a large number of users. System slowed down considerably with many compute bound jobs- remember our jobs are highly compute bound. As Prof Vijayan said , " we had a large number of crystallographers. They had compute bound jobs. This stressed the system." I started seeing the stress on computing at IISc and the totally unresponsive, incoherent and ineffective management of the centre. The only one who was interested in the technical aspects was R Krishnamurthy, a student of mine in ME and all others had no clue of running the system. Communications amongst themselves and with users didn't exist. I was involved with computer centre management till 1984. I will discuss more on this later.
Second, Prof G Krishna became the chair of my department,School of Automation. I became a member of the active committee of professors. The department breathed a fresh life and openness. Everyone was happy. It was a big change and transition. So I got involved with most activities in the department.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
23/12/25, 5:04 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   933
Let me continue with my involvements after return from IIT.
Third, GK asked me to head the hybrid computer facility. Though hybrid computer usage was declining , the PDP/11 mini was extensively used by our students. I gave assignments of assemblers,loaders and operating systems and students programmed then in the PDP/11 machine. I took charge of the facility and continued till 1995, a long tenure.
Fourth, I was made chair of two committees - one to revamp the new ME computer science program and the second one relating to starting a BE program in Computer science. 
Fifth, another major change was the setting up of an evaluation process for employees. A process was evolved with seven evaluation committees and a central evaluation committee. I was made the chair of the central evaluation committee. It was a big job with responsibilities to set up the seven committees, schedule the interviews,get their assessments, analyze and declare the final results. Evaluations are done twice a year. I continued with this committee till retirement, again a long tenure.
Sixth,ASTRA activity was picking up. Now many were living in Ungra village. We started on a community bio gas plant project. Lots of purchases had to be done. Most buildings were under experiments. So I was appointed as a joint convener of ASTRA and took over the admin responsibility. We set up an office. I was traveling to Ungra not regularly ,but several times in a year. So I had a tight job in ASTRA signing hundreds of bills, getting approvals, coordinating the activities and checking the budget.
I was also sad about something else that I observed. AKN spent a lot of time reading and writing. But his human relations were not going well. Prof MVN who built the instrumented bio gas plant , Prof Ramaprasad, and many others who showed a lot of interest in ASTRA moved away. Only KS Jagadish was active in ASTRA. While ASTRA was increasing activities,it was becoming a loner. 
Seventh was the analysis of data collected through surveys. I started working on that. The first step was the conversion of the collected data in papers into a machine readable form. I found Mr Mallya who undertook the job. So I assigned that task to him. Once the data on punched cards were available, I would do the analysis. Programming was a simple task.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
24/12/25, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.   934
Let me continue with my new activities.
Eighth, a big path changer in my research areas happened. This started when I was in IIT itself. I mentioned about it- my interest in data and data base. I decided to work on database more than on OS.I liked relational model compared to the then prominent commercial models- hierarchical and network models. While both were available in the main frames, nothing was available in minis. So I wanted to build a relational database system - without any SQL at that time. I got a student to build this relational system. He actually met me when I joined back in march79 and I agreed to guide him. We decided to focus on an agricultural database. He completed his work by 1980. 
I started teaching the database course in the institute from 1979 onwards and continued it for two decades. I started with Date's book. But the book was bad. I had to rewrite his definitions of normal forms. After a few years,I got Ullmann's book in the Indian edition. That was a good book and I used it as a text book in my course afterwards. I tried to redo most definitions precise. I looked at many books, but the best was CJ Codd's classical paper on relational data model published in 1970. Indian companies started using relational databases only in 1985 or so. Even then, there were many hiccups in usage.
Nineth, I got involved with the students project program of KSCST. It was a major activity for me also.This was started in 78 and we invited project proposals from students from many engineering colleges in the state including private colleges and selected many and funded them. Initial projects were focused on rural area problems in agriculture, irrigation, cooking, renewable energy ,bio gas,rural transportation, support to artisans like potters, smiths , etc. I felt that this would be a transformative activity not only for KSCST, but also for many engineering colleges in the state.About fifteen plus colleges participated in this program in the beginning. Colleges outside Bangalore showed more interest than the city colleges. Most principals were excited and gave their support to this program.It energized about 100 faculty in the state. Before this KSCST program, colleges were doing routine non motivated,non focused teaching according to a dated curriculum of the universities. This program exposed them to the skill of solving a real problem faced by our people in villages using technologies. That was a great change. They found meaning in the project work.Normally researchers choose a problem focused on finding an application for a technology or modification of a technology. Here we said ," look at the problems faced by villagers and select a technical solution for that." That meant that they were solving real world problems. They could see the current methods and build technologies into them. Most students were happy. 
In a few years, I enlarged the scope to electronics and computers. I handled one project in 1978-79 but by 1982, I handled about 50% of the projects. It was a heavy workload.
Let me discuss my learnings from the SPP program. I knew about the actual working of many engineering colleges in Karnataka. I knew about the capabilities of faculty members, management, principals, Hods, knowledge levels etc. I got a very large exposure. We could expose students to engineering principles, design parameters, experimentation and excite them. The initial request for proposals made them to think and do some planning.
More in the next post.
Dks
25/12/25, 4:47 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 935
Let me move to a general problem faced by middle class people.Bangalore city was growing fast. But house construction didn't keep pace with requirements. Though Jayanagar and Rajajinagar were developing with lots of people buying plots and constructing houses, our neighboring areas like Malleswaram, Seshadripuram were not building new houses for rent at that time. Palace orchards was an expensive locality. Yeshwantpur, Sriramapuram were not suited for middle class families. So renting a house became a serious problem. Rents were going up.Malleswaram was yet to be bitten by the bug of multi-floor apartments. It was still in its conservative small town slumber. As the bus facility was poor, and scooters had ten years wait time and motor cycles were not well known ,IISc faculty preferred to live in Malleswaram and  walk to the institute. There were landlord gundaism with some being thrown out of the rented houses. Rents were shooting up. So this scarcity hit the basic requirement of peaceful living. Most faculty were upset about this and wanted the institute to build quarters for faculty. An organization called faculty association was set up to coordinate this issue of quarters on the campus. It was working for about two years by 1979. It wasn't getting any attention or support from the director. There was no progress in talks on building quarters inside the campus.
We had an apex body for the institute called court, which consists of several external scientists, industrialists and all professors of IISc. It meets once a year. Its president then was JRD Tata. He was against spending money on brick and mortar. 
The association decided to attend the lunch that preceded the court meeting, but decided to boycott the court meeting. 
I attended lunch. Most faculty left after their lunch.I was about to leave after lunch and in walked Mr Kohli. So I stayed on and was talking to Mr Kohli. I first met him in 1968 and met him afterwards in many seminars and CSI conventions. It was a peaceful talk between the two of us. He invited me to visit TCS and spend some time there. That was a small step,but it led to an association that continued till 2022. I cherish that new beginning. It provided a big window to the business world- how technologies are adopted, who adopted them, where are the opportunities, what type of areas exist, what is the level of opportunities, where should one focus on,etc. I saw how slowly TCS struggled to become the number one IT company in India. It was great learning,worth a case study in management courses.
JRD was shocked to see thin attendance at the court meeting, enquired the reason and on hearing about the acute housing shortage in the city,announced a grant of rs.50 lakhs for construction of quarters. So started the first major activity of building A to E quarters,which was taken up by Prof Ramaseshan and completed in 1984.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
26/12/25, 5:06 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   936
I had another immediate task at home- my daughter's school admission. She had completed LKG at IIT and now I had yo admit her in UKG. I was hoping to get admission to Cluny convent,which was next door and hence easy for my daughter to go there. We tried through our neighbor and we didn't get a positive response. I didn't want to put her in a small garage running UKG program. I was looking for a school so that she could continue till 10th without changing schools.
I talked to Prof Joseph and he talked to the bishop. Unfortunately ,I got a recommendation for another school- Nirmala Rani school. So I admitted her there. Her teacher was a nice,soft person. She got adjusted to the school and liked the school.The school was in 18th cross, a few minutes walk from home, so no problem.
In the summer of 1979, I went to TCS to spend a week after the invite from Kohli. I stayed in TIFR hostels located in the campus. Me Kohli suggested that I meet all the leaders and know what is happening. He asked Dr PSB Murty to take care of me.I had met him before at IIT Delhi during a curriculum conference.The idea was to provide a window for business in the curriculum in addition to technologies and theory. But Dr Murty described the problems of payroll. He was on the offensive telling the academics the complexities of a payroll program. He thought his job was to convince the faculty about the complexity of business software. While the word software was well known, software engineering took a few more years to become a formal area of computer science. 
I met Dr Nirmal Jain first. We understood each other well.  He became a close friend. We are in touch even now. The first meeting was an ice breaking one and we started discussing many topics some days during lunch time.It gave me an idea on business operations and a view on software development. 
TCS was developing and running several application packages. So I focused my thoughts on improving algorithms, software development, and new technologies. I started on my familiarization program. That lasted for a week. I understood business, operations of TCS,and problems faced by TCS.
I met most groups in Bombay. I was impressed with the software group. I realized that they were working and resolving day to day problems. They worked in isolation and didn't network with the outside world. While Mr Kohli was a great networker with academics and business people- both technical and management persons- , most others weren't involved in networking at that time. So the organization had one drawback- it didn't know what was happening outside and what would be the future directions. 
Fortunately TCS had a strong relationships with Burroughs and IBM. But the models for business applications were evolving then. There were three models for business applications:
1.Total outsourced model - a precursor to cloud later. A computer intensive company would take a complete end to end job of writing the software, getting data and running the software supplying the results to the user. User doesn't buy or own hardware and doesn't hire programmers. This was the model TCS was concentrating at that time.
2.Partial outsourcing - develop software and sell it to a customer and help the customer to run it in his premises. There were a few projects in this direction in TCS.
3.inhouse model- some companies didn't like to outsource their operational processes to an outsider. So they built in house computer department , got programmers, built and run the programs in house with their own computer. Some didn't own a computer and used an outside computer on hire basis to run their in house programs. I knew several companies were going in this direction. Some examples were HAL,ACC,Tata electric companies etc. 
As I said ,most TCSers were proud of the company and their work ,but were inward looking without knowing what was happening outside except a few top brass. Attending CSI meetings would have partially solved this problem of ignorance. While Mr Kohli attended the CSI regularly, others didn't. 
The reason is the working style - a learning and firefighting mode. We will describe it in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
27/12/25, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  937
In order to understand the struggles and contributions of Mr Kohli, we should know the state of our computer economy at that time.
1.Computers were expensive and owned by a few organizations,mostly academic institutions. Imports were not easy and even mini computers were not available in the country.
2.Computers were used mostly for scientific work. Some organizations were using it for some business applications like payroll and inventory control.
3.Outsourcing was unknown. So convincing companies and banks to outsource their work was difficult. Many wanted in house computing.
4. Business model was different. It was B to B- a big change from the usual B to C model. Business requirements vary, individual organization based. No standardization existed. 
5. No business process was available.Customer involvement and domain expertise were essential.
6. Organizational structure is different. Empowerment at project level was needed. No central control. Talent search and talent allocation were major problems. 
7. Resources optimization was essential. All used a single burroughs computer. So allocation was crucial. Efficient usage was necessary.
Under the above conditions, Mr Kohli identified business opportunities very early and focused on applications. 
At that time, there was no business happening on program development in India. A few started writing Cobol codes.  Hardware sales were going on in small numbers. Government restrictions were high.
Though there were opportunities in hardware manufacturing, maintenance, system development areas, Kohli felt the future to be in software and services. He focused on project mode and not product development. He decided to concentrate on a new, untested area- software services. He established the services discipline. 
Mr Kohli's knowledge on the computer scene- present and future- came through many directions -
meeting with business heads in India and abroad;
meeting academics;
participating and lecturing in seminars and conferences;
Reading many computer journals regularly every day - a regular habit. 
His time management was very good. He was always looking for the future. He wanted to do many things on education ,agriculture and health.
In the initial period, he took projects end to end from application program development, data generation, running the programs, generating outputs and supplying to users- all with total confidence. Ramadorai was handling the business at the US end and I was told it was doing well. Both were pioneers.
So I visited every unit ,talked to the leaders and got a good understanding of TCS business in India. I met Mr Sahni and Dr Nirmal Jain several times. Nirmal was meticulous in details, had a lot of patience,listened to people.I didn't expect this kind of transparency and belief in me. I liked the software group headed by Haridas and the strong OR group. I submitted a report to Kohli. He read the report. I summarised my understanding and didn't put in writing my reviews and suggestions. I thought it to be inappropriate at that time.
I used to skip breakfast, had lunch at the nearby woodlands - sometimes with Dr Murty and sometimes with Dr Nirmal Jain. My student Lakshminarasimhan was working in Patni software with Narayanamurthy. They invited me for lunch one day. I had a simple dinner at TIFR canteen. I used to spend the evenings at TIFR library. I gave about six lectures on databases- my first lectures on databases. I was yet to start teaching database at IISc.
That was my story of my first TCS visit.
Greetings. Dks
28/12/25, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 938
What was my learning from my TCS visit?
It opened my views on the struggles of business. I learnt the following:
1. Business provides a large number of opportunities of applying computers to solve business sector. Academics ignored business programming. Only Mr Sarda taught Cobol programming at IIT Bombay then.
2. Though business has many dimensions, most businesses want to look at their accounting and financial operations. Banks had a lot of problems of scale. TCS looked at and applied computers to solve the inter bank transactions reconciliation activity. Similarly TCS also identified share market accounting as another major area. TCS identifications were correct.
3. Most jobs were outsourced jobs by banks and industries. User understanding and involvement were minimal. Trust was good between TCS and its business customers. 
4.TCS picked its employees from IITs and IISc and also picked several seniors at lateral entry level. It preferred ME/MTech pass out persons. It had some with CA experience and some from IIMs. Still most had no background in core computer science areas like data structures, systems programming, operating systems, programming design, problem solving etc. It was a big drawback.
5. Most employees were busy learning on their jobs and had a weak knowledge level particularly in CS area. They didn't have futuristic thinking. But most were committed to their jobs, spent hours on programming and were serious.
6.TCS top management had a strong customer focus and its actions were customer centric.Customer understanding and satisfaction were considered essentials 
7. No tools were used then. The employees called as associates- I consider the nomenclature very important- were learning programming and computing from experience. They didn't have formal knowledge of data-flow methods, design approaches to handle large programs. It was a bad period. Most trained on small problem solving were writing large programs- no modularity, no control, no design, no strong debugging procedures, no serious documentation of the software.Adhocism was evident. I put my students through a problem analysis and design phase before coding, but found people here starting with coding. I saw this adhoc approach followed by PSI to design their software. They spent all their time in debugging and changing the code with no documentation.I discussed with Dr Ravindran on this. I encountered this problem in most software industries in India even in the nineties. Dijkstra was not known to most programmers even though his book on the discipline of programming was released by Mr Kohli in 1975, I think, at the CSI convention. Both he and Prof RN released the book and I bought it.
8. Software engineering was just getting into production mode. I did performance studies in Manchester. I was reading several papers on software engineering. I read the maximum of papers in this area of software engineering. But no measurements were attempted at TCS.
The summer of 1979 got me involved in IISc admission activities. We were conducting entrance exams for admissions before the GATE was initiated. We conducted entrance exams for BE, ME, and MSc(eng.) admissions. I opted for going to Bombay to conduct the exams at IIT. I thought I could meet my friends.
I met Prof De, the director and was talking to him. I was telling him that I liked IIT a lot and would love to come back. I also visited TCS for a few days. 
The next academic year started with lots of activities. I met Prof Madhav Gadgil in the centre for theoretical studies. We discussed about energy and environment. He talked about the Bedthi river hydro power project and the agitation by local people in Sirsi in Uttara kannada district, about 400kms away from Bangalore. That excited me and got me thinking of alternatives. The forests department of Karnataka also was against the project. 
I studied the DPR prepared by the planning commission, a rebuttal by Paranjpay, and the objections by local people and forests department. Then I developed a new concept of total energy. While we get hydro power from the water drop and that is a plus point, we lose the energy from biomass that will be lost due to the submergence of 10000hectares of forest area. So I got the net energy obtained from the power plant and calculated the cost per unit of power and it was higher than thermal energy costs. Since the construction cost was about 60% of the total cost, I reduced the submergence area to one third, I got a much lower cost for power. This new idea was exciting.  I got different views on the hydro project.
Madhav said that the local people wanted to organize a conference on this and I agreed to participate and present a paper. Thus started my long journey in the area of ecology and environment. It deepened my studies on energy.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
28/12/25, 6:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: 2025 is leaving us shortly. It is time to remember how each one of us lived 2025. What good things happened to me? What good things have been done by me? What new lessonsI learned in this year? What were my problems ,worries and challenges?How did I encounter them? What was the outcome?Am I satisfied and happy now that I did my tasks well?
This contemplation will improve our confidence and consciousness levels and move us through 2026 happily. Let us welcome 2026 with happiness, hope and cheers.
Greetings. Dks
29/12/25, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 939
These discussions with Madhav and others were interesting and provided two different angles,one environmental angle and another economic angle.We had discussions with Fr Saldanha, reputed botanist and taxonomy expert ,Dr Kailash Malhotra, who studied the locals in these areas particularly the nomadic gowlis, Dr Paranjpay, economist, and Mr Shyamsundar,Chief conservator of forests.  It revealed a few facts:
1.Hydro power planners don't care about destruction of forests and the life of people living and eking a livelihood there.  I found that the biggest project Sharavathi valley hydro power project was designed with a carryover reservoir storing not the rain water from the catchment area based on average annual rainfall  but the total submergence area was calculated based on the highest annual rainfall.This led to a destruction of larger forest area. Madhav had shown by then that people shifted from sharavathi project were settled in another forest area which was later submerged for the Kali project. They were shifted again, destroying their lifestyle and living. This social aspect was not considered by our planners and executing engineers.
2. The focus of hydro project planners was to show the economic viability- benefits to costs ratio should be above 1.5- that is the economy should get 50% more than what was spent. It was shocking to see that these numbers were manipulated to show a ratio of 1.5 in the DPR. Paranjpsy's recalculation showed the ratio to be less than 1.0.Economics of planning was manipulative.
3. The engineers maximized the submergence area to get maximum hydro energy and avoid spill overs. But they did only one design. No alternatives were considered. That was a tragedy. Most costs - about two thirds-were going into the dam and canals construction and only one third of the total cost went to the purchase and installation of the required equipment. There is an optimization existing there and not considered by the designers.
4. Engineers didn't understand the damage to the environment caused by the project. I learnt about biodiversity in these meetings.
I started defining the problem of power generation from a totally different angle. 
The first question is to look for optimal submergence area. So the area will be a variable and construction cost depends on it. It also affects the cost of displacement and afforestation.
The energy supply should consider both biomass energy available in the to be submerged area and hydro energy. So net energy available will be hydro energy to be generated- the lost biomass energy.
The cost of electricity generation should include not only the construction cost ,but also the cost of reforestation-compensatory forestry, cost of rehabilitation of the displaced people, and the cost of forest wealth lost. We should consider the social costs also. 
 I did the integrated, multidimensional model, and reworked the cost. We found the project to be not a viable one.
I also suggested a much better option of going for a run of the river hydro plant with minimal submergence - about one fourth of the proposal-, and the capacity of the generating plant to be increased from the proposed 200MW to 600 MW. That helps all. That was my paper for presentation at the conference. 
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
30/12/25, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 940
A conference on the Bedthi river hydro project was arranged in Sirsi in Uttara Kannada district,about 400 kms from Bangalore. Madhav arranged a bus for about 25 people and we went to Sirsi. We left in the morning and reached by night. I was put up in a hotel, but many stayed in the houses of a few farmers in neighboring villages. 
The conference was organized by the totagars cooperative society. It was open to all. Since most attendees didn't know English,but we spoke English, Prof LT Sharma, principal of the local college, took upon himself the task of translating the talks.
Madhav gave the first talk.Mine was the third talk. It was well received. I talked about reservoir size reduction, run of the river option and micro hydel projects. It was understood and appreciated. Prof Sharma explained my talk in Kannada to all and repeated my suggestions repeatedly.
I was told about some special breakfast given by the people. So I told the organizers. They shifted me to Bhyrumbe and I met another great person,Mr KM Hegde,a progressive farmer. I tasted their dosas ,very thin done on an inverted pot. It was great. I met Mr Hegde Kadve,MLA. He was a simple man living in a room in the hotel and didn't own a car. In addition to Kannada, they also had a language of their own -havyaka.
Mr. Shyamsundar,CCF,Karnataka said that Karnataka was losing forest lands rapidly. He said that people didn't support their views on deforestation. He also talked about large scale firewood supply from forests to big cities like Bangalore.
Another paper I remember was by a forester who estimated the cost of a tree taking into account its role in oxygen production, water retention and soil regeneration as 15 lakhs of rupees against a firewood value of a few thousand rupees. That is realistic costing. This means we can't bring nature into our economics. Nature will win hands down. Remember that we survive because of nature.
Some people told me that one Mr Ganapathy Hegde had set up a micro hydel generator in his house. They took me to his house. The villages were in the midst of forests and hillocks. The terrain was hilly.We found his house at a lower level and a spring was there with water flowing in from a height of 50feet above his house. He had put a pipe and connected a turbine and generator. He used the electricity for lighting and drinking water pump. 
He told me that in the 1960, the Sharavathy valley project was under construction. He met Mr Narayana Rao,chief engineer and got the idea from him. I told him that I know Mr Narayana Rao.I was impressed by his innovation without any technical knowledge.
We visited the gardens in the evening. These are areca gardens with many areca trees. They also cultivated pepper and cardamom. We were giving a demo of harvesting areca nuts from trees. The person climbed a tree, cut a whole bunch containing hundreds of nuts and with a rope he jumped into another tree- amazing skills. We saw the processing and also saw the production of paints organically from arecanut shells. It was a great experience. I was talking with Prof Sharma. We became close friends.
Then we were taken to the Sonda mutt. Prof Sharma introduced me to the Shankaracharya and told him about my suggestions. The swamiji blessed me. We had dinner there. We returned to Bhyrumbe. 
I met Mr Shivarama karanth the next morning. I sat with him and listened to him and learnt a lot from him about farming, education, ignorance and environment. He also told me about Yaksha gana. It was a great learning experience. I learnt a lot about the west coast of Karnataka. 
I decided to leave by bus that night. I got a packet of pepper and another of cardamom from the society and another set from my host. My stay was memorable. The enthusiasm and energy of the people were unbelievable.
I left for Bangalore by bus at 9pm. The bus broke down midway. I took another bus and came home in time for my lectures next day.
Prof LT Sharma quickly edited the proceedings of the conference with all publications and produced a book.
This conference was different from the hundreds of professional conferences that I had attended. It had a lot of public participation, involvement, interest and excitement. Considerable effort and planning had gone on to run the conference.It was conducted professionally, and the time management was good. My network of connections enlarged. 
Greetings. Dks
30/12/25, 6:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: The story behind Ekadasi, a sacred Hindu fasting day dedicated to Lord Vishnu, stems from ancient scriptures like the Padma Purana, primarily featuring a demon named Mura and the divine feminine energy, Ekadasi herself. When Vishnu rested after fighting Mura, the demon tried to kill him, but a powerful woman emerged from Vishnu's body (specifically from his Ekadasha Indriyas or eleven senses) and beheaded Mura. Pleased, Vishnu granted her a boon: whoever observed a fast on her day (the 11th lunar day) - no rice-would have their sins destroyed and attain liberation (moksha). 
Today is vaikunta ekadasi,more special day when the doors of Vaikunta, the abode of Vishnu will open. People in South visit many - at least nine- vishnu temples on this day hoping for moksha. 
Greetings. Dks
31/12/25, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 941
When you talk to most people about the education of their children, the common worry is the building of mathematical skills in their children and mugging up to get good grades. They don't understand the importance of inculcating the qualities-contemplation, concentration, carefulness/ mindfulness,higher levels of consciousness. Another big weakness in school education is one dimensionality - specialization, expertise. This is dangerous. We don't understand the dangers of focusing on specialization at the cost of generalization. Unfortunately experts are overrated. Experts look at the past and work on a narrow topic or area. They can't look outside their domain. We need to break the barriers. 
When software was developing initially in the late seventies, I saw the tussle between programmers and use departments like Finance, sales, admin, stores etc. Programmers concentrated on coding and ignored the problems of users. Form filling was a complicated task unlike now. Even system analysts refused to understand usage aspects of a program. User friendliness came up only in the late eighties. Programmers had one dimensional approach - coding and optimized coding work.
Our problems are defined with many constraints:
1.We are good at looking at parts ignoring the connections and connectivity.
"You can't really know anything if you only look at isolated facts. If the facts don't hang together on a latticework of theory, you don't have them in a usable form. You have got to have models in your head. "
Charlie Mungar,Berkshire Hathway
2. We assume that solving a problem implies only mathematical approaches mostly. So we approximate and simplify a problem so that it can be modeled.
3. We simplify- use deterministic variables, known concepts, linearization etc.
4.we don't describe a problem. We look at a problem with ignorance, neglecting social ,environmental and economic aspects. The best example is the design of the Bedthi project by ignoring people, forests,real economic values etc.
 The best answer is to teach a general course on practical problem solving.
The experience of looking at a problem from multiple dimensions-energy,economics, the environment,society, technology, etc- gave me a lot of insights into what is missing in our life. It dwells on several practices we should do in our early life to be prepared to meet challenges. 
Greetings
Dks
31/12/25, 7:39 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Let us wake up to a new dawn of the new year. Hindus prayed daily 
“Let all in the universe be happy”
“Let me into light from dark, truth from untruth”
“Let there be peace everywhere”
“Let there be harmony. “
“Let us share.”
Let us remember this and pray for the welfare of all.
Happy 2026.
Greetings. Dks
01/01/26, 3:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 942
Let me continue with multidimensional problem solving.
Let me give some examples of challenges I faced in my life until 1980. 
We need preparations to meet challenges.I had many preparations from my early age from 7 years onwards. 
First get multidimensional affinity and thinking.
I became multidimensional at a young age - school studies, organization, finances and economy,moral values, religious studies, love for several languages like Sanskrit, Tamil,Hindi,English, political learnings and society. It was a very lucky happening for me. Let me start with one instance that helped me:
Conducting a ten day public sri ramanavami function- this function was organized by my uncle every year in the village. I was his assistant and student in this activity. This work taught me several aspects like identifying the activities and their requirements of men,materials,money; preparation of detailed planning; documentation and transparency; integrity and proper maintenance of accounts: time management; people management- get people to do the many tasks, satisfy the egos of some,fair dealings with all in food supply -. I was slowly initiated into this annual activity by my uncle. 
All these started when I was seven years of age and continued regularly till I was 20 years old. These were my life lessons:
1. Life should be organized like a function or an office. Order is key to a happy life, not just discipline. Be organized in whatever you do at home, office or society. Life is not adhoc, not impulsive,not dependent on others. Life is a complex multiple set of interconnected systems.
2.Independent thinking, acting and working are essential to free us from bondage and dependence on others. I started doing the shopping from age 8 onwards.That taught me responsibility.
3. Understand society, the behavior of people, 
4. Remember mind makes a person. This is a high impact statement to be understood every day by us. Confidence and positivity are the necessary elements in one's life, not for success alone but even for worry free living.
This gave me an important life lesson. 
Don't be afraid of unknowns, new items and accept challenges. I could face challenges as I had some basic tools to attack general challenges.
My purpose in life was to become a dynamic problem solver.
So I easily moved from power systems to computers to distribution systems to energy to environment to transformation without hesitation and solved several tough practical problems like Bedthi power plant, Delhi electrical distribution, IISc power design, computerization at IISc, and state government, IT for Jindal Steels, Central silk board, core banking, networking design for many organizations, COWAA for department of space, mahithisindhu program etc.
I used multidimensional thinking in these projects.
My second strength which helped me is my reading habit. I have loved reading, again from childhood, books and magazines. I loved social fiction, biography, history in the beginning years. In school days I used to read two fiction books every week. Later in my college days ,I moved to English books of both fiction and nonfiction.I loved detective stories and PG Wodehouse,Jerome K Jerome and more social novels by several English authors like Dickens, Thomas Hardy, Pearl S Buck, Hemingway and many others.I used to read at least one book per week. I also read some serious books on Yoga,Upanishads.I was familiar with Shankara's life and teaching. I have heard Ramayana about 50 times in those days and also read Mahabharata - all these during school days. 
That habit and training helped me in my life. First, I understood the multiple societies, cultures and lifestyles in India.I empathized with the problems of poverty and suffering. Most importantly, I learnt about people, their egos and behaviors from books and from my father and uncles.That was a great learning.I knew the political and economic problems faced by the country. I started building connections between all these- humanism, the economy, society,politics, education. My introduction to technology came later. These readings helped me to build a large canvas of views of several disciplines and more importantly their connections. I realized early that political strategies during the Nehru era delayed our development and economy. This also brought me out of my different wells in the village,city,state and exposed me to multiple new realities. So I started looking outside to gain awareness- outside meant looking at different kinds of people,culture state and society as well as different disciplines and domains. I don't want to call myself a computer scientist. That will be a partial view of me.
All these helped me in looking at all problems encountered by me through many dimensions. I didn't exclude any dimension. My outward looking approach also helped.I learnt that problem solving is a detective work,not a pure mathematical or logical or a computational activity.
Greetings. Dks
02/01/26, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   943
The Sirsi conference was in mid 1980. After returning from Sirsi,I was getting involved with Madhav to prepare a proposal to set up a centre for ecological studies. Prof Ramaseshan became the director of IISc after Prof Dhawan's retirement. He wanted to improve the academic excellence of the institute and move into new areas.He wanted to set up many centres and planned a supercomputer centre also. He wanted to improve the operation of services like library and computer centre. He called me and talked to me about computers even when he was the joint director. He had good impressions about me. I used to meet him often. 
I want to recall one incident here. I always had a deep interest in education from school days. I have read Gandhi and Tagore on education, saw Rajaji's experiment and felt that educationists don't analyze the very complex problem systematically. We never had a common syllabus for the 90000 plus gurukulas - each followed its syllabus. When I read UV Swaminathaiyer's biography, I saw his search for gurus in many places and learning from many gurus. But educationists today believed that one size fits all is a correct approach.I was not satisfied then and to say frankly am not satisfied now about the state of education and engineering education in India. I was constantly thinking about solutions to a number of questions like 
What is the purpose of education?
Does our current system achieve those purposes?What is wrong? What are the solutions? How do we implement them?
Does our system provide effective understanding of what is taught?
What are the difficulties?
What are the remedies?
Can we improve the system?
Is it possible to build an education system that satisfies all?
Is uniformity of education a good idea?
How much engineering content is there in the engineering programs?
I was clear in my mind about teaching, quality and evaluation to a large extent. I used to read many books on education and continue to read them even now. I borrowed a book on education from our library and liked it. I discussed it with Prof Ramaseshan and gave the book to him to read. After about 15 days, I had to return the book and went to the director's office and got the book from him. His secretary gave me some advice- don't give a book to the director and expect it to be returned. They have thousands of books and it will be lost- a very sound advice. The incident was to show that there is a shift in relationship with directors. With Prof Dhawan, I wasn't in a discussing situation in the early days, but moved to a timid discussing situation later. My suggestions were politely worded and discussions were formal and strictly functional. But with Ramaseshan, it was more open. Later with Prof CNR, it was one sided.
Also my daughter completed her UKG by April 1980. I decided to admit her in the kendriya vidyalaya at IISc. An entrance test was conducted. She was shy and scared. She got admission.She joined in the school and went by a bus provided by IISc for children going to IISc school. The bus stopped in 16th cross,11th main - that is a short distance from my house at 14th cross. Madhav's daughter and son and SPG's sons traveled by that bus. So my daughter had companians.
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
03/01/26, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 944
Mrs R Anantharaman comments:
"Dear Anna,Namaskarams.A Very Happy New Year to you.Your daily Posts provide us with much food for thought and have enriched us multidimensionally .I enjoy most, the parts where you speak elaborately about the values and  lessons of life which you learnt as an youngster in our village, under the mentorship of Periappa.I think that your personal experiences and objective analysis of the functioning and growth of IISC over time have to be preserved in the archives of IISC, as a treasure for posterity.Your narratives reveal how your  holistic approach in resolving practical problems  has yielded desired results in the service sector and benefitted the common man to a large extent. We can see that,whenever there is a new challenge,you have  open minded interactions with all stakeholders , go to the root of the  problem, prepare a well- structured report,dissect the nuances, recommend various options  and find workable solutions based on consensus. Your thoughtful insights  and fruitful contributions in the fields of education, teaching, administration,  curriculum,research,rural development,power sector etc are mind-blowing. We eagerly await  the milestone of your one thousandth  post- a remarkable feat  indeed! Thank you for taking us along this wonderful journey.Namaskarams."
My response
Thanks. 
I am writing because of the encouragement from many of you. It surprises me that people read, filter out information not usable by them,and some give critical comments - and these for three years, really amazing. Mr. ABL who is past 90 years said yesterday that he reads most of my posts skipping technical ones. I thank every one.It gives me energy to go forward.
What I call multidimensional is a variation of the term polymath.
definition:polymath is a person with deep knowledge and expertise in multiple, diverse fields, demonstrating significant competence across various subjects like science, arts, and humanities, rather than just superficial interest. Driven by curiosity, they can connect different knowledge areas to innovate and solve problems, with historical examples including Leonardo da Vinci and Benjamin Franklin.
Polymaths offer a broader perspective, preventing the "tunnel vision" that can come from extreme specialization, fostering creativity, and helping to bridge gaps between different disciplines. That is the difference between these two terms. But today it is specialization. We need to reverse this trend. 
Polymath means a person who is an expert in many areas. Polymath people are rare. Hence I talk of multidimensional thinking.
Multidimensionality means something has multiple aspects, features, or layers, going beyond a single perspective to capture complexity, like how poverty isn't just lack of money but also poor health, education, or living standards, requiring integrated solutions. It applies to concepts (culture), people (complex personalities), and systems (data analysis), signifying a richer understanding emerges from considering various interconnected dimensions. 
Multidimensional thinking encourages us to dive into the layers, peel back the complexities, and embrace the richness of different viewpoints. A range of perspectives necessitates no simple answers that will work for everyone, in every context. One size fits all will not work here.
While polymath means discrete expertise in many areas unconnected, multidimensional thinking implies looking beyond one area and connecting to other relevant areas. It focuses not on areas but connections and flows. 
Let me look at another example. Ecommerce. It applies digital technology to commerce, but its success depends on
1.affordability, price, competitiveness
2.quality
3.ease of use ,user determinism, product clarity.
4. User behavior knowledge.
A designer of an ecommerce platform needs to integrate technology , commerce, price mechanisms,user understandable software,timely delivery,optimal operations. Here the key word is integrate.
Greetings. Dks
04/01/26, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 945
Mr H S Nagaraja on Mrs Anantharaman's comments:
"Mrs. RA's excellently scripted comments  about the daily posts are by & large the views of every reader of these posts , I am sure.My special thanks to Mrs. RA and Happy new year 2026 to all.🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏"
Dr Chanakya makes very extensive comments on multidimensional problem solving.
"My outward looking approach also helped.  I learnt that problem solving is a detective work, not a pure mathematical or logical or a computational activity…………" DKSWhen we take involved /responsible roles in multiple domains, I have found that it helps one to simultaneously examine the problem at hand by wearing multiple coats/hats without need to provide immediate answers /solutions.  Learnings from these lived experiences allow us to simultaneously spread domain-based filters /examine the problem in multiple domains while also giving them various weightages for potential causation as well as identify path for potential solutions.  Here is where I found that the book reading habit gave us some strength, patience and perhaps a strategy; it allows us to pause the critical thinking process (to pause and examine tangential paths – seek out what is not said /stated explicitly and also question the veracity of the obvious path tendered) without losing out on our original search approach, strategy and rigour.  Various detective /whodunnit novels of our times – Agatha Christie, Arthur Conan Doyle, Erle Stanley Gardner, Sidney Sheldon, Le Carre’, Alistair MacLean, Fredrick Forsyth, etc. specialized in confounding the evidence to take us away from the real /hidden clues.  Add to these the ones quoted by DKS; Hemingway, Dickens, Hardy, PS Buck (to fill in more societal issues), we have almost always learnt that the case presented before us has multiple dimensions and needs to be analyzed with appropriate filters in multiple domains – quite often the answers exist in a different dimension.  Let me give an example from the environmental domain: The famous Bellandur Foams.The Bellandur Foams actually has a 20 year old history starting circa 2003-2004.  Various agents /agencies /institutions were blamed based upon using information gathered from the internet sources- for example, the heavy metals, phosphatic detergents, mysterious bacteria, etc.  In the subsequent years, as the problem grew stronger, even “Lake on Fire”, mysterious Industry discharges, commercial Laundries, Car washing units, etc. were blamed and the Courts even closed them.  The Foam didn’t stop even after six months.  The Foams continued and PCB quietly withdrew their orders.  Let us confound the problem a little bit more.  If one blames a particular or a group of substances, then heavy rains should dilute them and foams should cease.  Ironically, the foams emerged immediately after heavy rains negating the conventional logic of implicating high concentrations of a suspected substance.  Why should heavy rains that dilute the Lake’s water by over twenty times cause foam – counterintuitive!Detailed and sustained investigations revealed that there were over 55 domestic wastewater discharge inlets into the Lake.  All these released their share of detergents (washing machines, kitchens, shampoo, etc.), all of which gradually got loosely bound to the sludge settled in the Lake and got concentrated over a hundred times.  With every heavy rainfall -runoff event, this sludge was stirred up, detergents released and when it cascaded down over 50 feet over the spillways, foam production was inevitable.  Add to this our perception of what a good shampoo /detergent should do – recall the great ads for shampoo ‘displaying the girl with shampooed hair with a large foam corona!’  The detergents marketed had high foam stability and as a result the foam remained unbroken for over 100-150 minutes.  Stitch these from different domains, causative agents, environmental-ecological retention in water body sludge, re-dispersal during monsoon run-off, spillways dropping detergent laden water over 50-60 feet fall, foam stability as a quality of the detergent, dispersal of foam from Lake sludge, etc. you get an answer to the problem.  Any one domain could not have explained this issue.  By the way, such large foams are seen in Yamuna (Chat Festival nearly 20km long), Hyderabad, Chennai, Madurai, Ambur, Mysore, etc.  Yet only Bangalore foam becomes a problem of international importance.  To make a long story short, clearly a multi domain knowledge /experience /thinking /assessment could resolve this nearly 20 year old problem.  Water shortage problem of 2024 summer, treated wastewater recycling in Bangalore, etc. follow very similar paths.  Much of our problems solving efforts require multi-domain knowledge, forays and experience.  They don’t follow the older logical, linearized solutions generally purported as DKS has brought out.  Thank you DKS to raise this issue.  This also becomes important when we mentor our FAER mentees who are often stuck within their narrow ‘educational blinkers’.  Happy New Year"
Thanks to both. 
Greetings
Dks
05/01/26, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 946
My response to Chanakya's comment. I feel that we need to address several issues here.
1.Make both teachers and students to understand the limitations of formal education. Formal education is not end all. It teases you and does not teach you. That means you get a small and not always true glimpse of reality.
Education is not a push system. It is not a one way system. It should be a pull system- students guided by teachers pick up what they want to know. They should have freedom to learn, question, critique ,analyse ,understand and go forward or deep.Education is interactive,not monologue.
PG Wodehouse writes ," education is not putting something into a child, but pulling something out from inside a child."
Mel Robins writes a simple principle - let them. Allow the children to decide. Don't assume you know everything in this fast changing, uncertain,complex world. Teachers are not the know-all people anymore. 
2.Both teachers and taught should  learn to be skeptical and question the so called facts. Just as religion started with a search for reality, education should be approached in a similar manner - to search for the many facets ,components and connections of reality and build a big structure of learnt concepts and seen/ experienced concepts.They should discuss the pros and cons of several beliefs produced by the formal education system. I feel that we know that religion is based on faith and beliefs. Don't you think that education, particularly social education, is also dogmatic based on biases,perceptions and beliefs. 
3. Education should focus on building confidence,inculcate reading,writing and thinking habits and provide opportunities for creativity. Dogmas have no place here.
4.Let me give an example of the point- how education restricts us to a well orchestrated system. 
I taught OS- operating systems- for 20 years. OS in reality changed a lot from the old IBM 360 OS to UNiX to MsDOS to windows to Android of many versions. But OS taught has remained the same. OS text books have remained the same. OS concepts have changed over time in reality but not in teaching. Dockers don't find a place. User interfaces to chatbots are ignored. I discussed this with many faculty for decades. I commented on this during reviews of OS books and in academic councils, but no understanding and hence no changes. So we are struck with 1973 mindset. This has to go. 
So we need to become open minded, flexible and accept that questioning and criticisms are fundamental rights. Multidimensional approaches to our disciplines is a high priority.
5. We don't teach generalized problem solving philosophies. That is the need today. Processes will be taken care of by AI.So move up in thinking.
6. Practical problems are fuzzy and partially defined. Consider a practical problem- selecting a future education program for your child after school. How do you decide? First you collect information on universities and courses. Then you decide on the money to be spent and the means of getting it. Then you decide whether you want the child to be near you or can go any place. Then you decide courses of interest. Now you sit as a family with your child, prepare a list of probable candidates- universities and courses, and start discussions on all the candidates with all members participating in discussions. You go through each candidate, identify its advantages and disadvantages, discuss in detail, and collect more data. Also look at the future, the growth of the areas,job opportunities, stability of the universities etc. People also globally looking at universities in many countries.Consult friends, look at market, and discuss. Then you look for compromises and take a decision based on emotions and reactions. Try to take all along. Intuition and heuristics play a big role. Multiple aspects will be looked at. Emotions, acceptability, costs,beliefs,aptitude,adjustments at the university,social advantages,cultural similarity, familiarity etc play a part in the decision making. Mathematics plays a marginal role. We need to address human traits in arriving at decisions. You may get many answers. So you go for another filtration. Also see that the decision is not based on a single parameter, but on many factors. It is a multi-stage process.Finding a job, life partner etc may be more challenging with too many uncertainties. That is what I call search, and discovery process.The study of problem solving by people should be taught to children.
Greetings
Dks
06/01/26, 4:50 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 947
As we enter the eighties, let me look ahead the eighties decade and its impacts on me and the country.
The eighties ,I consider as a waking period for the country. It woke up to new technologies.We, the normal Indians, became aware of technology and its advantages. We moved from an agrarian economy to a mixed agriculture and industrial economy. While the seventies focused on industrial goods, the eighties slowly moved into consumer goods. But quality is still a long way ahead. The high quality of HMT, which in the sixties established precision machine tools infrastructure and produced high quality lathes and great automatic watches, was not appreciated by the government.
 The eighties saw a major shift in the government focus from public sector to private sector. The Indira Gandhi government wasn't the original strong government. It was a weaker version. No bravados like Garibhi Hatao or Indira is India slogans. Even the planning commission lost its focus on large projects. It became an also ran institution. The vigor seen in Nehru's days and Indira Gandhi's early days was gone. We didn't see any major government projects . Even the power sector struggled.The telecom sector was totally ignored till the nineties.
Bangalore started changing from the sedate public sector focused industries and mini industries to a power house of electronics industries and educational institutions. This change was initiated in the seventies with the electronics city being set up. I think Bangalore had two flashes of great planning - the Peenya industrial complex in the sixties and the electronics city in the seventies. Both became the nucleus for the industrial growth of the city. But the eighties - particularly the latter half- started building Bangalore into what we now call as silicon valley of India. I saw the seeds of this and played a major role in this transformation of the city.More on this later.
Coming back to the country, electricity reached most urban households. Godrej refrigerators became available. I bought one in this period. TV entered India with limited public broadcasting by Doordarshan.By mid eighties, color TV was available. I bought an inexpensive Eiko TV by 1984.Telephones were still under ITI and the department of telephones. Getting a connection was difficult.
But the major technology making inroads into medium to large organizations was the computer. 8 bits VLSI Intel chips and Zilog etc were available in India. PSI set up in Bangalore in a small building, in the mid seventies, started with the production of controllers with zilog processors and by the eighties, it graduated to producing small computers with operating systems.But its focus was hardware and it neglected software principles.I bought one for KSCST from Zenith. It was called superbrain. While main frames were costing crores of rupees and were considered a white elephant, these small computers were costing less than 10 lakhs of rupees and the cost was coming down. It was a period of computer curiosity and experimentation.Fortunately, the government allowed the import of micro processors and a few companies like PSI in Bangalore,Zenith in Bombay ,DCM and HCL in Delhi started assembling small computers and selling them. Companies used them for calculations like an advanced programmable calculator and were typing letters.TCS moved fast in software services in many countries. It saw opportunities, accepted the challenges and built software systems for many companies across the world. It was a software building phase and COBOL became popular. Database started picking up only in the late eighties with both Oracle and DB2 becoming popular.
While India didn't embrace minis of PDP/11 , it started absorbing the micro computers.But there was no programming expertise available. COBOL was still strong, but couldn't be used in these small machines.So usage didn't pick up till mid eighties when Eiko came up with low cost 8bit processors with displays and keyboard integrated into a single unit. By 1987 we got a PC and email connectivity. ERNET was established giving us email facility.That led to a new life.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
07/01/26, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 948
Let me list the changes that were introduced and built in the 1980 decade. It is a watershed period. Most of us think that the nineties is the watershed period in India. That is due to our combined single myopic -one dimensional- view of only the government control. 
Let me apply my multidimensional thinking here. I consider economy of a country as a mother discipline depending on many factors and engineering, science, mathematics are dependent disciplines. So let me ask - What are needed for a better economy?
The factors needed for better growth are:
Freedom to do what you want - to build and operate industries. Reduce government control
Resources- steel, cement, metallurgy,automobiles,electric devices,etc
Finances - capital and credit availability, purchasing power. Allow better financing by banks . Liberalize loans. 
Mindset change- communist to free market.
Leadership and entrepreneurship- awareness,innovation,collaboration, flexibility,empowerment,diversity etc.
Talent pool- education,skills,training
Infrastructure- electricity, gas, water,data centers,banks,etc
Logistics- roads,telecommunications
Government policies, plans, programs, incentives,promotions,interventions, regulations, subsidies etc
As I explained before , the free market concept started in the eighties itself. Let me list the changes brought in the 1980 decade
1. The biggest change was the mindset on the public sector focus. Policy planners realised that public sector alone can't help the economy of a country and so moved away from that mindset . They encouraged private sector in many areas.
2. Computerization picks up and moves across. A bigger number of industries showed interest in computers , bought small machines and played with them.
3.Engineering education grew by leaps. Many engineering colleges came up in the country. Karnataka took a lead in the sixties itself and was ready to bring in more number of students into engineering. Engineering education had moved into mathematical mode in the seventies. So the eighties saw a big growth not only in the number of engineering colleges in the country,but also in the number of new disciplines being added. The government facilitated this by setting up AICTE to direct our education. Also the computer availability helped. We were ready for IT revolution with enough talent.
4.Many software and system development companies came up in Bangalore. They helped many industries in the city and state. Similarly many training institutes came up in the city.I feel these small companies who did a great job were the early startups in Bangalore.Some big ones like NIIT also came up at that time.Many of these companies started teaching programming to school students as special lectures. So I saw the popular growth of computer activities.
5. I saw many leaders coming up during this decade. That was a critical factor for the growth of the economy.By late eighties, hundreds of companies came up bringing out leadership skills in many. Several from large IT companies also joined or started companies. Most of the leaders were self taught. I found it remarkable that during the eighties, hundreds of people learnt on their own various aspects of computers and applications. That gave me positive hope about the country. Similarly hundreds of engineering colleges started computer science programs by 1990 and most teachers were not trained on computers. They learnt on their own the computer courses which they had to teach. 
6. Computer manufacturing also picked up with CMC, HCL,Wipro, and many others getting into the act. 1985 to 2000 was the period when desktops were built in India and we were close to the latest technology available in the world. 
So I will say that our liberalization started in 1985 and not in 1991.
Let me discuss my developments in the 1980 decade.
Greetings. Dks
08/01/26, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 949
I felt the mid 1980 to be a transition period for Indian economy. We moved towards industrial and services economy. With green revolution, agriculture stabilised in India. But it remained in the same state for a long time. There was no grains scarcity after the 1965 period.
I looked at the state of economy in the eighties with the following objectives in mind:
1.To set the stage for the readers to understand the state in which I was living.
2.To show that economy is a multidimensional activity but seen in a linear manner.
3. To show the linkages between education, technology, jobs, consumption,and leadership.
Let me next look at my state. By 1980,I had a lot of experience ,lot of learnings and lot of activities. My mature phase begins now. My attention moves to the societal factors.My India views became very broad . I had many kinds of friendships and encounters with bureaucrats and politicians. My multidimensionality increased. I became a societal problem solver ,not just an engineer. I applied my knowledge to solve hundreds of real problems faced by the country and state.
I was a loner - what do I mean by this? 
Not that I shun friends. I had a larger friend circle. I used to attend one meeting or a coffee sesdion,selection or purchase or formal discussion every day in addition to my lectures and talks and meetings with my research students every day. I met several sales and engineering persons every week. 
So I meant loner in a different sense. Loner meant two things for me.
One, even when I attended meetings or discussed with friends, my mind will think of some topics and will move through that. That means I am present in a meeting and contribute to the discussions, but also think on something. I take my mind away from the surroundings and immerse in some aspects. 
But the second is more important. All of us are loners for a good period of time while trying to get sleep. I spent hours everyday sitting or lying in the bed and contemplate about many things. This improved my cognition, my awareness and my knowledge level. No precision, no worry, no need for correctness, no conditions  will enter such contemplation. I don't get sleep easily. I will be awake for hours while lying in the bed before sleep occurs. This is my internal learning and understanding. This habit is very useful for my mental development.
While certain aspects of my work like academic performance, friendships and networking, moving into new areas and accepting challenges continued throughout my life, I added many new dimensions to my activities during the eighties. I put them in three baskets - societal concerns and social relevance for my work, environmental concerns, and overall energy situation. So I developed a new realistic research focus - realism through people surveys and data collection. The first major data collection was the rural energy survey- that was done in the previous decade and became a forerunner for my work. My second activity was looking at the water situation in Bangalore. We collected a lot of data.Pleasantness was not a virtue unfortunately with me.
I became mature. Fear of failure was reduced considerably. Confidence went up to a very high level. 
I became my master. I didn't look for approvals and appreciations from others. I started asking myself about my meaningful and useful role in society and the actions to be done by me to achieve that. Sirsi conference gave me the impetus. My work was defined and governed by my thinking and introspection. This period was a focused social period in my life. True I didn't discard my academics. The academic work continued with its vigor ,but I took on a lot of social work. My definition of social work is to educate government, institutions,organizations on the future course of action in addition to supporting public discourses on important factors affecting local population. So I donned several cloaks- one as a family man,another as advisor, an third as activist,a fourth as motivator/ educator etc.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
09/01/26, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   950
Let me look at my society oriented journey. Actually it started quite early in life, during my village life and school days. During those forties and fifties, India was just coming out of a darkness in economic aspects. There was a scarcity in every thing. Education facilities existed in a few metro cities and they were a few. Higher education was difficult and not affordable.
So we needed to live with society, the societal bonds were strong. To make a big story short, we lived most of our day life in public, all actions by us were in public view and spread across the community. There were very few secrets. We used to help others ,participate even in their decisions and definitely participated in most religious activities. We learnt scriptures from the elders in the village. 
My grandfather and father had good scholarship in Sanskrit and Tamil and delivered a series of lectures on Ramayana in many cities and villages and they played a psychology role to families in grief by quoting appropriate scriptures. Theirs was a public service. So I got that habit from them. The concept of service got strengthened and organized by my uncle as I have told several times. 
That is my preparation. When I joined IISc as a student and later as a faculty, I focused my public service concept to the institute. My focus was technical and managerial with empathy for people. It is a free service. I never expected any payments. My work as warden of the hostels, as chair of power committee to improve the power supply to the institute for over 35 years, as chair of evaluation committee for staff promotions for 14 years and many others prodded me for service to the institute. I did a minimal extension in the mid sixties and early seventies by providing free programming support to many outsiders. I understood and appreciated the help I got from NAL,HAL and TIFR computer staff propelled me further towards service to people.
I started public service with ASTRA by understanding the life and problems of villagers.
Now it enters into new areas like energy, environment and power plants. It moved with a big scale in computerization activities of the state government and many organizations. That continued till now. I moved from being a pure theorist to a practical applications solver in the field - in government departments,government units, universities, colleges, schools, hospitals,steel plant,organizations, banks,companies etc. My activities spanned many dimensions- selection of computers, software, networking, ERP, architecting, programmer selections, software installations, power supply systems,lectures, courses, curriculum formation, conference, etc. 
All my activities were conducted in several forms and with many institutions, NGOs , government departments, schools , NSS units, and professional institutions and not restricted to computer field alone .I might have participated in more than 600 activities during the three decades following 1980. That doesn't include my research conferences ,academic courses and consultancies and advices.
I will discuss these in the next series of posts.
From the personal side, my health had got some changes. I was diagnosed as a diabetic in 1980 and I had a heart problem in 1987. But I controlled them well till date. So no concern. 
This decade of eighties was a period of growth and education of my children. We put both into KV IISc and both went through schooling till 10th class in KV.
Quite a few things happened during this period. We will discus them in sequence.
Greetings. Dks
10/01/26, 4:37 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 951
Let me start with 1980 occurrences. My daughter was put in KVIISc after an entrance test. We were clear about the selection of school at that time. Several factors weighed in our selection. 
First was the curriculum. I saw the KV curriculum much better than state curriculum. The students had regular home work , they had broader and deeper curriculum, books were good and the science subjects at high school level was better than the state curriculum. The curriculum was broader with Hindi and social sciences. The students at high school level did a project work.I was happy that allows students to work independently, read books, search materials ,think and learn presentation- one stone hitting several mangoes. This also builds and boosts the confidence of a student. When I was in IIT, I observed the KV children. I found they were socially strong, they had good communication and discussion skills,and participated in many activities. Generally KV built better persons. Their egalitarianism was liked by me. Private schools built a non existent superiority complex in their students and that was absent in KV students. The children can study up to 12th class and no school changes are required.
Second, the question addressed was - should I admit her to a girls school? Cluny is next door, easy for her to go by walk. The disadvantage will be that my son should go to another school. That is not desirable. I felt that both should go to the same school.
Third was the reachability. IISc KV was reachable by bus.
Fourth, the proximity to IISc was a big advantage. They could talk to faculty in many departments. We organized special lectures for them.
So we decided on KV.
The next decision was admission of my son to LKG. We were lucky that MES college started a new school in 10th main, close to our residence in 11th main.We admitted our son there. Again, I didn't want to admit him in garage run play schools. He was happy there, found a good friend,Nikhil. We became close to Nikhil's parents- Kasturi and Uma. They were living in 11th main. This friendship is a long one,continued for several decades till now. Kasturi is no more. Unfortunately,Nikhil also died in an accident while doing his engineering studies.
Let me describe the detection of my diabetes. I had been close to our health centre from the beginning. I interacted with both TB SubbaRao and BS SubbaRao during my hostel wardenship. I saw the progress of the health centre under BS Subba Rao. I considered BSS to be a thinking and careful physician. He listened to the patients,and found treatment.He helped me at many stages in my life even after retirement from IISc.  I didn't have any major health problems till 1980 except the usual cough and cold appearing periodically.I was also a good friend of Mr Nagaraja Rao. I admired his passion for education- more courses, his interest in movie making and his friendly and helpful approach towards all.
Around 1980, Dr GR Nagabhushan joined the health centre. Dr BSS introduced general health checkups. So I opted for it and after the test, Nagaraja rao told me that I should meet Dr Nagabhushan. That was the time when patients were attached to a doctor. Till then, one can go to any doctor.I met Dr GRN and he told me about my diabetes. I was started on tablets and within a week ,my blood sugar came under control. I started drinking coffee without sugar. I avoided sweets, reduced the consumption of rice. I always had the habit of walking and I continued that. I started taking two to three spoons of soaked fenugreek seeds every day in the morning and I continue it even now. Regularity in food, tablets, exercises helped me a lot.
But the most important aspect to be considered by a diabetic is a positive frame of mind. I had seen my grandfather and father suffering from diabetes. So I knew that I would inherit it. I was prepared for it. So when the news was announced to me, I wasn't shocked.I wasn't worried. But I saw many people, when told of having diabetes, started worrying as if they had lost everything in their life and kept a glum and mourning face with no confidence to face life. The worry increases sugar level. Emotions affect blood sugar levels. So emotion control and creating a calm mind and positive mind are essential for a diabetic. Meditation helps a lot. I took this announcement as a routine one mentally, decided that I won't change my work schedules, travels and activities and I will regulate my living status with limited food, exercises and medication. I made it clear to myself that my quality of life will remain the same,diabetes or not.
I experimented with many natural remedies like eating cluster beans and bitter gourd. I also tried drinking the water from soaked okra and found it very effective. My breakfast routine changed then. I moved to oats and continue with oats even now. All these helped me to survive this long. Dr GRN assured me that I will live up to 70 years. I am surprised that I am still living now- a bonus addition to my life and am happy. It is due to my discipline and positive and active mind.
Greetings. Dks
11/01/26, 5:23 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 952
One of my major transitions or I can even say transformations that happened to me during the 1980 decade was my movement into environmental aspects of technology and energy. This involved a larger interaction with Madhav Gadgil. The first effect was the Bedthi project which changed my one dimensional thinking on hydro power and made me look at alternatives by looking at all forms of energy, not just electrical and cost optimization as well as environment. This holistic approach to problem solving led to me to address the challenges I faced in future through multidimensional approaches.
When I was planning to write about my interactions with Madhav, I heard the shocking news yesterday that he is no more. That was tragic. I know a lot of people working for the enhancement and enrichment of our nature, but the most effective person has been Madhav. He consistently worked for more than four decades to address several problems faced by the forests of the country. It was due to him that we got the ministry of environment set up by the government of India. He got involved with the western ghats program for several decades. He was a ground level working scientist, not a talker at higher levels. He was sincere, hardworking with a lot of in depth ground truth and a great reader and writer. 
I had four major activities in 1980 involving four persons. I was joint convener of ASTRA and so had a lot of interactions with AKN. With GK as chair of the school of automation, my responsibilities increased in the school with plans for ME computer science program and starting a new BE computer science program. I was also interacting with the director on the computer centre operations.In addition, my other activities like power committee , evaluation committee etc continued. 
A new development took place. IISc along with many professional societies in Bangalore formed a group called proficience. Its main task was for IISc to offer several evening courses at the same level of rigor as that of our regular courses for industry engineers. It was a full semester program, taught by IISc faculty and we followed IISc evaluation procedure.We started with about 10 plus courses in june 1980. I ran a course on computer organization and design. It was a new experience. It was a successful course. I continued teaching several courses for the next ten years.
I saw a lot of differences between Madhav and AKN. Both are deep thinkers, there ends the similarity. AKN talks well, but wasn't a ground level worker. He shifted away from rural focus by 1981. That was a tragedy. Madhav focused and concentrated on his core competency till the end. He was committed to his cause. He achieved a lot. He succeeded with stopping both silent valley project in Kerala and Bedthi project in karnataka. He made policy makers to look at endangered areas of western ghats and he worked tirelessly on that goal. 
Our discussions were focused on the Bedthi project. He also was preparing a proposal to the ministry of environment, government of India to set up a centre for ecological sciences at IISc. I was a cosignitory for that proposal. 
Meanwhile ,the state under Mr Gundu Rao as chief minister set up two departments - one for science and technology and another for ecology and environment. The chief secretary was looking for a scientist. Initially AKN raised the request , I didn't show any interest. Madhav raised that point with me in oct 1980. He said they want someone at additional secretary rank. He asked me. While I was initially reluctant, I said ok at that time. 
I met Mr Jayakumar Anagol, who was the secretary to the chief minister and a scholar in Philosophy. I discussed only my commitments with him. We agreed that
"I will continue teaching and research at IISc.I will continue visiting TCS and lecturing at PSTI. "
He agreed with my conditions and said that a government order would be issued immediately. I met Prof Ramaseshan and told him about the develooments. He welcomed the proposal and agreed for a year of leave for me. So I accepted the offer and informed GK.
Let us discuss that journey next.
Greetings
Dks
12/01/26, 3:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 953
Let me describe my new journey with the government job.
The first question that occurred to me and others- why did I accept the job? Many, including Prof. Ramaseshan thought that I would change my direction and job towards government service.
I asked myself why am I going for this job?
One thing I was clear- my love for academics is very high. I love the freedom to learn, to widen my vision and to work very much.I pretty much did what I wanted to do and how I wanted to do with love, interest, enthusiasm and excitement. So I was clear that my main job is IISc, nowhere else. I won't leave it. This was true when I went to Manchester first and IIT Bombay later. That resolve stays with me.
But as seen in my discussions, I was concerned with the discovery of problems. I always looked at problems. The questions I pose to myself are
What are the steps in solving a problem?
We go through several stages
1.problem discovery- gaps,improvements, modernization, usability, new requirements etc.
2.problem description. Simplification. Formalism. Constraints
3.problem definition - define models , objectives,constraints,goals etc.
4. Possible solutions- solution discovery. It includes discoveries of technologies, business models, commerce, culture, transformation methods, metrics etc.
5.detailed solution methods and approaches
I said look outside for problems not just your discipline. My second view was to look at users and applications. My third view was to look into the future and identify changes. I always felt humanism is a dominant factor in problem discovery.
So I wanted to understand the problems of people. My talk with Anagol emphasized that aspect. He said that their emphasis was to Identify the problems faced by many departments and use science to find solutions.I liked that clarity. That was new for me and I got excited by another approach to problem discovery. It opens a whole state for me.Our education neglects problem discovery from the user angle and looks at it from the STEM angle. It is not realistic. While the focus of education is to know the reality, the methodologies of education lead to artificiality.
But this job gives me a different approach. It became my mission. I was happy with the clarity I got about my role.
I made another change to Anagol's approach. It was easy to look for problems from the government departments. But I decided to enlarge my scope- to look for problems from organizations, groups of people and NGOs. I didn't reduce their values. So I visited many parts of the state. I felt that it is important to understand the genesis of a problem along with its characteristics. That meant visits and more importantly discussions. I followed this throughout my life.
My second task was to propagate technology and concepts adoptions and absorption.
I joined duty by end October 1980. Mr Jayakumar Anagol took me to the chief secretary. I was assigned an office in Vidhanasoudha. I had two sections headed by two section officers and one under secretary. Mr R Krishnamurthy was the undersecretary, a very duty conscious, a straight forward and highly pious person. He was also humble. I admired him. 
We all hear of corruption in the government. I was taken aback by the honesty I found in the Vidhanasoudha. Most IAS officers were honest, though I heard about a few dishonest ones and they were kept out of the mainline. Most staff were honest. Several legislators were honest.Most were simple and honest people. They did their job sincerely. But ignorance and disinterest pervaded amongst the staff. I didn't see motivation in most staff members in the secretariat.
My job gave me a lot of opportunities to meet people involved in governmental activities, from departmental heads to officers as well as farmers, foresters, teachers, and common people.
More in the next 
Greetings. Dks
13/01/26, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 954
It was a tough time. I had my lectures in the morning at IISc and left for Vidhanasoudha at 10am. I would return by 430pm back to IISc and attended my activities. 
My routine office work was not heavy. But I had to create my work. I followed the routine-Visit and talk to people,identify problems, understand, find solutions and implement it- an end to end activity.
I had two organizations under the two departments- KSCST and pollution control board.
I had lot more work in the environment area than in S and T. We had a lot of concerns with environmental issues. 
The pollution control board was not effective. They found excuses for not acting on complaints. Several cases were pending in the department and courts.
One case related to Harihar polyfibres polluting Tunga Bhadra river. They were manufacturing  rayon fibres from trees. They extracted cellulose from wood pulp and left most of the wood as waate into the river. The potability of water and health of people using the water caused great concern to the people living down stream. The case was going on for several years with no solution found. Birla's were firmly in command.
The second one was the pollution of Kabini river at Nanjangud. Industries discharged their waste water into the river and the drinking water inlet pipe was also there. So the city was getting polluted water. No industry was willing to put up a treatment plant. If they set up a water treatment plant, they didn't operate it. Both the administrative and regulative authorities were standing by the side and not taking actions. We had a meeting with many local people of Nanjangud and the industrialists, but no acceptable solution was found. So I instructed the board chairman to take strict actions as per law.
The third was in Mysore. A factory was letting of waste water into the Cauvery river. It was a paper factory. Its waste like Harihar polyfibres contained a lot of lignin.It is pure energy. The factory could convert it into bio gas. They didn't do it,but released this black liquor into a canal of Cauvery. That affected the local population. They couldn't drink this untreated water or use it for cooking.
There were several such problems.
Let me look at the fourth case.Similarly, another case was pending for long. A plywood factory located close to the world famous chennakeshava temple was burning plywood waste. The exhaust gas affected the flag post in the temple. This was going on for many years with no solution. The board said that the air pollution act can not be used to take action. I found a section in the archeology and museum act with provisions to act against such offenses. So I took the matter to the chief secretary. He approved the closure of this factory. I issued directions to SP Hassan to close the factory. It was done. Some newspapers wrote against the action.
Let me look at a problem concerning forests.It was the setting up of jungle lodges in Kabini reservoir area. It was to be set up in the forest area by a private company.There was an objection to this proposal. Many felt it was on the path of the migration of elephants. I met Ullas Karanth for the first time. He got a letter signed by a few eminent people like R K Narayan and Shivarama Karanth addressed to the PM, Mrs Indira Gandhi. Her office sent it to the CM for proper consideration of the case. The government appointed a committee and it didn't support the proposal. So that project was dropped. Ullas became a good friend. I supported his project financially. That made him change his path to ecology and tigers.
I addressed several problems like solar cookers, water heaters, wind mills, bio gas plants, wood stoves, afforestation, water pollution, air pollution, salinity, sedimentation in reservoirs,etc.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
14/01/26, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 955
Mr Srinivasan, ex PNB 
"Good morning sir.  Pollution control is a serious issue.  Please Increase the discussion,  by devoting a  separate chapter."
My response
I feel unhappy that even today, we are unaware of pollution. We suffer with low air quality in Delhi every year, but didn't find remedial measures. The current approach to development ignores the environment.
Let me discuss the scene in 1980. As I said before, our PM Mrs Gandhi realized the fact that the problems faced by the country were related to the abuse of nature. She felt that development could not continue on the usual belief - business as usual. So she took some measures- set up two departments, one for environment and another for renewable energy.
Mr Srinivasan's query allows me to go back to my learnings on environment and my role not only in the government but afterwards also.
Let me start with an understanding of what is environment?
Environment means natural resources like soils, water,air, biological resources and natural forces given by sun, wind, storms, rains,ocean waves and turbulence etc .
Chamakam lists all natural components like rivers, streams,canals,lakes, rivers, wells,mountains,multiple geologies, etc. Rig Veda discusses the forces and includes their effects. It shows gratitude to all. It considers fire as an intermediary.
When we talk of the environment, we don't address the dynamics of resources - accumulation, regeneration, consumption and depletion. Our living and our consumption affects our environment. Resources are of two types- renewable and depleting. The resources we obtain from the sun are renewable. Certain resources are built up and stored on our plant. Examples are- minerals like coal,ores, soil, natural lakes,petroleum,biomass, forest, corals,ground water,etc. When we use them, their total stored quantity reduces with time. So the cardinal principles are
1.use mostly renewable resources.
2.increase efficiency of use and reduce dependence on stored resources.
3. Our consumption produces waste. Minimize the wastes. Reuse the waste. Retrieve usable items from the waste. Nothing is a waste in the world.
4. Increase the storage units. Afforestation is one example. Increasing biodiversity is another example.
5. Substitute one depletable element with a producible element where possible. Aluminium in place of copper is an example.
6. Protect the vulnerable entities. Project tiger is a good example.
Adherence to these principles will lead to sustainable living.
We need to understand how our development activities were affecting our environment in the year 1980 and even now.
1.Deforestation is a major concern in the world and India also. 
We are losing forest areas at a high rate due to the clearing of forests for agriculture, industries,human settlements, mining, hydro power plants, irrigation reservoirs etc and also due to cutting of trees for firewood and timber. Many industries like paper, match,rayon,etc use wood from trees as raw materials. There are many examples of these types of industries depleting the neighboring forest areas. Wimco depleted the Dandeli forests.
Forests were destroyed for mining several mineral ores , coal etc. We depleted forests for extracting mica ore, copper, iron, manganese,gold, alumina etc. Coal fields are located across the east and central India.
We also destroy forests to construct reservoirs for water and power supply.
So forest destruction is going on unabated in our country.
We use firewood for cooking and water heating in most houses, hostels, canteens and hotels. India has a large number of small industries and those using boilers use firewood to fuel their boilers to get steam. As an example, the Vidhana soudha canteen used half a ton of firewood as fuel for cooking. 
The problem of firewood is severe. Our source is mostly trees in villages and forests. While many villagers collect firewood from their neighborhood, the supply was depleting and so they depended on firewood from forests. Cities depended on firewood from forests.Bangalore,in the sixties, used to get its firewood requirements from the neighboring forests reaching till Kanakapura ,about 60 kms from here. But in 1980, the city was getting its firewood from the Uttara Kannada district, a distance of about 500 kms by eight train loads and about 400 truck loads every day. In many parts of the country, people on a daily basis go into forests and cut or collect wood. They transport it on their head or bullock cart or by bus or train. Selling firewood in cities is a livelihood activity for poor people, like selling vegetables. All these also led to a higher diesel use to transport firewood. So the problem of wood for cooking and water heating was becoming serious social and ecological issues.
So we can't go on cutting more trees and reducing the forest cover in the country. We need to find alternate solutions. That was one of my main tasks in the state government.
You may ask - why are we worried about forests? We consider forests as nuisense and always destroyed forests. But our vedas  knew the importance of forests, trees and water and hence venerate forests. 
Forests are not just places with trees and insects and may be wild animals. A forest is a veritable treasure trove,a store house of trees, plants, fungi, hummus and enriched soil and rain water. It is the living support for not only plants but also for insects, animals and birds. It is a regenerative system. It provides biodiversity. It provides us with our needs. Isa upanishad says it belongs to god and use it sparingly. Gandhi says
Nature can meet our needs but not greed.
Since the forest department was traditional and the problems of ecology needed a fresh thinking, the new department was set up. Similarly Karnataka government also set up a department of ecology and environment. We had a running feud with the existing forest department. Fortunately, I had three advantages.
1. The chief secretary was the environment secretary.
2. I established a great rapport with Mr Hoskote, the secretary of forests and the special secretary. Mr Hoskote was related to Prof R Narasimha,my senior colleague at IISc and a great friend. He understood the problems of the environment better than forest officers.
3. I had met the principal CCF of forests ,Mr Shyamsundar during the Sirsi conference. He understood our views. More importantly, he appreciated my support to address the major issues of forests caused by the power, agriculture and irrigation departments. So while some considered this new department as their enemy, he considered us an ally.
But the department had a second urgent problem that is pollution.
More on pollution in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
14/01/26, 5:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: According one analysis today is sankranti as the sun's transit to northerly direction starts at 3pm. Some others celebrate it tomorrow. This is a festival when we show our gratitude to Sun for the good harvest we get every year. Greetings on this occasion to everyone. 
This is also the day when we remove the old and bring in the new. Let new positive thoughts emerge from all.
Dks
15/01/26, 4:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 956

While ecology and forests were not on the radar of common man,pollution was the most perceived problem by the common people. By 1980, its effect was felt by people.
Pollution means deterioration of the usable quality of resources like water, food, air,ambiance,soil,etc. Pollution is caused by our actions.
We need resources to survive and live. But our usage affects the resources both in quantity and quality. 
A brief sketch of the situation in India in 1980 is given below.
The most serious problem was water pollution. Most rivers in India were polluted. Over a period of time, even pond water in villages was getting polluted. A study conducted in Kolar showed that even ground water was getting contaminated and fluoride content was either low or high. So the first effect was a struggle for potable water, some felt it was a struggle for water for living. Our ASTRA survey of six villages in Tumkur district showed the struggle of villagers to get water from ponds over distances of a km or more. Hand pumps weren't there in most villages. Only after Ramakrishna Hegde became chief minister, he took the installation of hand pumps with a mission mode. This shows that we shouldn't look at pollution problem as an end result but as a supply and demand- process interaction and consider treatment and reuse as an integral part of a municipality or an industry or an apartment block.
Most rivers were polluted with waste water discharges from industries and sewerage water from municipalities. Remember that people are dependent on river water for survival. So when they drank the contaminated water, they got sick.It was estimated that more than 20000 deaths took place every year due to Cholera alone. For example, there is a river called Lakshmana Tirta and it flows through Hunsur city near Mysore. During monsoon time, the river gets a copious supply of fresh water. But during summer, the fresh water availability becomes very low. The flow in the river was mostly sewerage water. So dilution theory won't work in such conditions. So every year, people in Hunsur are affected by cholera due to the use of contaminated water. 
That is one example.
We read in school test books that cities get treated water supply. This is a myth. The treatment was simple filtration,not enough to remove fecal, chemical and heavy metal impurities. The state of tap water was bad in the 1980s. With new filtration technologies like RO, situation is better now. But the recent incident in Indore- mixing sewerage water with drinking water- doesn't look like an isolated one. Nanjangud incident which I narrated before shows poor planning. Most cities didn't treat their waste water. 
Remember waste water is a good source if treated properly. It is collected through sewerage pipes and so can be treated in a central place. Bangalore started anaerobic treatment of sewerage water in the sixties itself. Prof SC Pillai of IISc was the primary consultant for that project. That plant could produce bio gas as another output in addition to treated water. It was a pioneering work.But this treatment plant wasn't maintained properly. It was ignored.Myself and Krishnaprasad visited this place in 1975 while working on the KSCST project on community bio gas plants. This opened our eyes for a holistic look on the problem. The waste water released by industries or urban use contains energy. 
This is what we saw in Mysore where black liquor released into a canal by a paper unit polluting the water stream was a rich source of bio energy. Normally the contents are measured by the oxygen levels in contaminated water- called BOD and COD.High BOD means a higher concentration of bio waste, that is bio energy.
Same is true with the Harihar polyfibres story - letting untreated water with a lot of cellulose and lignin into the Tunga bhadra river. Again ,it means waste of usable bio energy.
While nature looks at water as a closed cycle- ocean to clouds to rain to rivers to ocean. But our planners don't see a water cycle - supply to use to contaminated water- I am avoiding calling them as sewerage or waste water- to treatment to reuse- a closed cycle. They made it an open ended system. So everybody thinks " waste treatment is not my problem." Then whose problem is pollution?
Greetings. Dks
15/01/26, 4:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy pongal to all. Dks
15/01/26, 5:15 pm - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir,
May this Pongal bring a harvest of joy and prosperity to your life! Wishing you and your family a wonderful celebration filled with sweetness and new beginnings.
Happy Pongal/Makar Sankranti.
🌴🌄🌴🌾🌾🛕🪁🪁
16/01/26, 3:56 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  957
We got a glimpse of water pollution seen by me in 1980. Despite both the centre and state governments coming up with laws for prevention of pollution, every entity decided to ignore it. So the situation worsened. This despite the advent of better and cost effective technologies for water treatment. Fortunately most apartment complexes have gone for in house treatment plants. They found the reuse of treated water less costly compared to the municipal supply. RO Water filters are the necessary part of most houses. While during the period 1965 to 80 I used to drink water from the tap directly. I loved the cauvery water- cool and refreshing. But no more. We started boiling water before drinking and later started using RO filters.
The next pollution was air pollution. We passed another act on air pollution. One important instance of air pollution that I handled in 1980 was the pollution from a plywood factory affecting the world famous Chennakeshava temple at Belur.
There was also soil pollution. I encountered a case in Bellary district. The agricultural lands adjacent to the outlet canal from the TB dam were becoming saline and not suitable for cultivation. I inspected the place along with Mr Gokulram,IAS,the DC of Bellary district, found that the cause was water seepage from the canal. So I suggested that the canal should be lined properly. The canal was a high rise one. That was a mistake. Civil engineers looked for a gradient for water to flow and ignored the flooding of fields and making them uncultivable. Thousands of acres of good fertile land was lost.
So I now come back to my concept of multidimensional problem solving for such social problems.
The  concern here is with the important concept of a class of human problems which can be called "notechnical solution problems,"Only recently we saw a change of approach with the swatch Bharat program- an awareness campaign. Now we see some improvements in our rivers. Many municipalities are serious about treatment.
We should realize the fact we will greatly increase human misery if we do not, during the immediate future, assume that the world available to the terrestrial human population is finite. We are attacking the commons. Village commons are orphans, even the government abuses them by giving it to industries. The proposed peripheral ring road in Bangalore will displace thousands of villagers and remove common lands. I recall the fact that the Maharaja of Mysore earmarked a lot of land in many areas as Amritmahal kaval lands to grow and develop animal species. But the present governments gave away those lands to industries and institutions.
The tragedy of the commons reappears in problems of pollution. Here it is not a question of taking something out of the commons, but of putting something in -- sewage, or chemical, radioactive, and heat wastes into water; noxious and dangerous fumes into the air.
The rational man finds that his share of the cost of the wastes he discharges into the commons is less than the cost of purifying his wastes before releasing them. Since this is true for everyone, we are locked into a system of "fouling our own nest," so long as we behave only as independent, rational, free enterprises forgeting social obligations.
During this period, I met hundreds of people - farmers, industrialists, small entrepreneurs, government officers, engineers, lawyers ,environmentalists, IAS officers,and politicians. It was a great revelation for me. It changed my view of India,its people and their mindset.
Some learnings are
Most people are sincere, work hard but afraid of their bosses.
Ambiance and culture in most places don't allow freedom and curb curiosity. 
There is a lot of ignorance amongst these people on- why am I doing something in my job? what is expected of me? There was very little learning for most. It was monotonous and purposeless living. That is why they become religious- a way to let out their emotions and get peace. That was a tragedy. That continues now also. Since the purpose of doing a job wasn't understood, most don't work hard.
I see every government office run by one good human being and that saves the government.
But one aspect that I saw not only in the government but also in most educational institutions, and most private industries and organizations is that mediocrity prevails everywhere. The ambiance is dictated by mediocrity. That curbs innovation and excellence. But more importantly, everyone from the top to the last is satisfied with mediocrity, accepts it as normal and lives with it. This irritates me.
That is why many Indians do much better when they work abroad. This toxic ambiance needs the attention of all of us. People don't think big and aren't allowed to think big.
Greetings. Dks
17/01/26, 4:00 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 958
So far, my interactions were mostly with faculty, students,power engineers and computer persons. But during my job with the government in 1980-81, I met a lot of people from different walks of life and at multiple levels from the highest to the lowest. I met ministers, MLAs, politicians, public figures, writers like Shivarama Karanth,foresters, agriculture officers, activists, vice chancellors, faculty, secretaries,IAS officers, secretariat and department officers, Deputy commissioners of districts, and had many rounds of discussions. I met several hundred people running the government.I visited many places in the state going across the state from Mangalore to Hubli,Dharwad to Belgaum, Bangalore to Bellary to Bijapur, Challakere to Gulbarga, Bidar, Sirsi to Yellapur, Davangere to Hassan to Mysore to Bandipur to Mercara. 
I realised that there is a strong linkage between policies, people implementing them, organizational methods, awareness methods and people at the receiving end. This connections concept was not understood by most people working at lower levels. Each person restricts his views to the task assigned to him or her and didn't bother about the impacts and hurdles. 
If I stayed at IISc, would I have these opportunities of looking at real world problems and the perceptions of concerned people. What I learnt was - every problem has many parts, connects many disciplines and all parts or entities are strongly interconnected/ intertwined, but the most important aspect to consider is the human angle and not the technical angle. Success depends on understanding the perceptions of people and adapting a solution to suit their views and convincing them and not the other way - push a technical solution to a problem and invariably you will create more problems - a good example was the Tungabhadra dam high rise canal designed for flow but destroyed a large area of cultivation.
If human behaviors and perceptions are more important for the success of a solution, then the important question is " today we have barriers and not borders between disciplines. How will we make the barriers into a thin and movable border with very strong connectivity to other components and disciplines? How do we reach people to make them understand the complexity of connections? "
The 21st century expects a better answer to these questions. Remember AI connects well through the millions of websites and connects data from many disciplines to come up with much better answers. It discards existing one dimensional models and can move into multidimensional approaches. It doesn't depend on mathematical models alone. But we live on a small isolated island. No wonder AI will overtake us if we don't start creating a new discipline of connections and create a structured knowledge focusing on connections and not on parts. AI will do the parts well, so let us move to connections. I consider this as a big learning for survival. The Current education system won't lead us to this path. Tinkering with our education won't help. We need mindset change and a whole new education mechanism.
In your opinion, Are these important problems or normal unsolvable ones?
Any comments on how we address the twin problems- acceptance of mediocrity and parts oriented totally isolated discipline focused learning?
Greetings. Dks
18/01/26, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 959
Some comments:
Prof Karunakara feels that environment is an important area.
Prof Basavarajiah,SIT,Tumkur:
Thought provoking article sir
Mr Debashish, ex TCS
I am very much in favor of collating all that these pieces to one place to come up with a book. Pathbreaking work indeed.
BS Murty
The cocktail of success you mentioned applied to all organisations not just IISC. Many organisations don't embrace these principles and fail. In my experience with 8 organisations Agility, Openness, Future Outlook standout. Thanks for sharing.I still urge you to write a book. There are  open online platforms . Publishing is far more easier. Present and future generations benefit.🙏
My response
Yes I want to write these in book form. Thanks.

Mr Thiruvelan
Yes, mediocrity defines us in every walk of life!🙏🏽
Dr TKMahendra Babu
Excellent opportunity to Dr DKS👍🙏
Thanks to all. 
Mr Srinivasan,PNB
Good morning sir.  After going through your post dealing with air pollution,  I  thought next should be noise pollution. Honking the horn, in a congested road is a regular occurrence. Yesterday  night,  someone in the complex WhatsApp group , has mentioned about the noise made by the fan in some other house with an appeal to get it repaired You may like to touch upon the economic impact of noise pollution at a macro level. Namaste.
My response
I agree with you about noise pollution.In 1975, when my daughter was a few months old, we moved into a house in the upper class residential area, Palace orchards. The neighbors used to go to the clubs and return by 12 mid night. They used to put their car horn at full blast so that their servant sleeping inside would wake up and open the door. Many people would do this everyday waking up many and disturbing the peace of the neighborhood. We suffered it for a few months and moved back to Malleswaram afterwards.
But when I discussed this with Mr Anagol, secretary to the chief minister, he responded by saying that Indians love noise. So there is no noise pollution according to him. 
Our cities weren't planned with silence zones. We find noisy workshops in residential areas. 
We have a bigger problem - space pollution in cities. Bangalore's foot paths have vanished. Many areas had garbage thrown all over. You can't walk in Bangalore nowadays. 
There are many such pollution problems. Sadachar is the only mantra to live with minimal wants to reduce physical pollution. 
But nowadays, I am worried about mental pollution. Most people are brainwashed. For example, in Tamilnadu, even today most people hate brahmins,propagated by the Dravidian groups.Is that an acceptable 21st century mindset?
Similarly ,our education conditions children with dogmas. This pollution is more dangerous and we should allow freedom of mind to prevail. But how?
Greetings
Dks
18/01/26, 5:22 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Dear Sir, looking forward to the book you are planning!!
19/01/26, 4:16 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 960
Mr Srinivasan asked about the economical implications of pollution. He is thinking of noise only ,but I think we should address the impacts on all forms of pollution. 
Before I do that, let me give more history on noise from the book stillness is the key by Ryan Holiday:
"It was the late first century AD and Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Rome’s most influential power broker, its greatest living playwright, and its wisest philosopher, was struggling to work. The problem was the ear-shattering, soul-rattling noise that poured in from the street below. Rome had always been a loud city—think New York City construction loud—but the block where Seneca was staying was a deafening cacophony of disturbances. Athletes worked out in the gymnasium underneath his suite of rooms, dropping heavy weights. A masseuse pummeled the backs of old fat men. Swimmers splashed in the water. At the entrance of the building, a pickpocket was being arrested and making a scene. Passing carriages rumbled over the stone streets, while carpenters hammered away in their shops and vendors shouted their wares. Children laughed and played. Dogs barked." So noise pollution is an old problem.
Let me take one example well studied by SITRA - south Indian textiles research association, a thinking and active body.
It showed that noise in a spinning or weaving section having thousands of spindles was deafening and many workers became deaf. Most industries in India have a noise level higher than the standard prescribed decibel levels. 
The higher noise meant that the bearings are not greased, it increases friction and produces heat, that means more input energy required and that leads to increased wear and tear, maintenance and cost. The culprit was the loose cotton getting stuck inside the electric motors and all moving parts. That increases friction. The loose cotton in the atmosphere affects the workers also. They get bronchial diseases and go sick. That reduces productivity. That reduction in productivity and hence in profits have been estimated. 
But another aspect was studied - the relationship between pollution and maintenance. They found that more than 100 electric motors failed every three months in one normal polluted factory compared to less than 30 for three months for the same number of spindles in a well controlled factory. The second factory had air conditioned its entire spindles room. The atmosphere became clean and livable. Workers became healthy, no bronchial diseases, productivity went up, labor morale got boosted, motors worked well, input electricity consumption reduced- many benefits. Then why is it most textile industries follow this approach? Mediocrity. You don't see beyond your eye?
I told a paper factory that the black liquor they are discharging is a big energy source. But they were not interested. Their job is to manufacture papers, not energy. Same was true of a sugar factory burning tones of firewood.
Normally ,pollution control gives multiple benefits. Let me look at sewerage water treatment by means of a bio gas plant. You get treated water. You get energy through gas output. And you get an enriched manure- you get three times Nitrogen through anaerobic fermentation compared to open composting. You get a cleaner place.If you do a cost benefit analysis ,a bio gas plant is a boon for the country. 
When we put up our bio gas plant at IISc ,it was constructed next to the entrance.Many protested that the entrance will be smelly. But after sometime, they said the place was not smelly, but clean. I said that was our intention to set up the plant there- to show that the place is clean and had no flies or mosquitoes that you find in open composting.
So definitely there are great economic benefits in pollution control. In most instances, pollution control produces energy and usable water.
I think we need to see the many levels of impact of air pollution next.
Greetings. Dks
20/01/26, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 961
Mr Debashish,TCS
"Air pollution is much more wide spread health hazard and dangerous compared to noise pollution. Air pollution permeates and grips large areas quickly whereas noise pollution is very much localized. However it doesn’t mean that we don’t need to take control of noise pollution, it’s very much required. Sir, as I mentioned earlier also your collective hands on experience can create a wisdom full book."
I was planning to write on air pollution next.
Air pollution has many types and sources, like dust pollution, pollen pollution, smoke pollution, accidental or hazardous pollution, radiation etc. While some are natural, most are human made.
We are familiar with several examples.
Dust comes from natural dust storms due to winds, construction dusts, cleaning dust etc. Those in the vicinity get affected by dust. North India gets dust storms from the desert winds.Dust particles enter our nose and go to the lungs and settle there. 
Pollen pollution comes from plants. Parthenium allergy was a well known problem in the seventies and eighties in Bangalore. It became a dominant species and started growing in most open spaces in Bangalore leading to allergy, sickness and productivity losses. KSCST took up this as one of the first problems to be addressed.
Bhopal gas tragedy , LPG blast etc are accidents and lead to loss of life and property. Forest fires are a major source of pollution.
The most dominant form of air pollution happens mainly due to the combustion- burning- of carbon fuel externally in a stove or boiler or internally in an IC engine running our generator sets or vehicles like trucks,buses, cars and motor cycles. We get carbon particles, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide.These gases linger in the lower atmosphere for some time before moving up and diffusing with other gases in the atmosphere.
The first level impact is what Delhi experiences due to vehicular pollution. Delhi also complains about air pollution due to the burning of agricultural residues in the neighboring states of Haryana and Punjab.
We saw the effect of polluted air from a plywood factory on the world famous sculptures at Belur Chennakeshava temple. Mr Veerappa Moily, the finance and tourism minister at that time got terribly upset and annoyed at this pollution and called a meeting where the chief secretary was present along with me , the pollution control board chair and the superintending archeologist. Both officers were diffident and gave excuses. I told the minister that we can close down the ply wood factory using a rule in section 13cof the state museums act. The chief secretary said he would issue directions immediately. Accordingly I prepared a letter to the deputy commissioner directing him to close the factory. The letter prepared within 30 minutes after the meeting was signed by the chief secretary and conveyed to the DC Hassan. We closed the factory. The superintending archeologist was not happy. 
This was what London experienced as detailed by Sherlock Holmes - pie soup fog. That happened due to the burning of coal in buildings for heat.By banning coal fired boilers ,these cities became cleaner. 
India has a lot of indoor pollution particularly in north India and during winter months when coal is burnt to heat a room and cooking is done inside the same room.This affected children and elderly.
The first effect was felt by our lungs. Carbon particles stick inside. We are also affected by carbon monoxide poisoning. A large population gets affected by asthma. The quality of lifestyle becomes poor and productivity becomes low. Visibility on the roads will become low leading to vehicular accidents.
Greetings
Dks
21/01/26, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 962
Let me continue with air pollution. Industrial emissions include other chemicals also in addition to CO2. Coal burning, common in thermal power plants and many industries, leads to the emissions of sulfur. Sulfur combines water vapor and oxygen in the atmosphere to produce sulfuric acid and it produces acid rain. Some industries like cement produce dust also.So air pollution is a complex problem.
But the next level of the effect of carbon accumulation is more serious and that is what we talk about a lot now as climate crisis. Carbon di oxide is a stable compound found in our atmosphere. It permits sun light and heat into our atmosphere. This filtering and trapping of sun's energy is called the green house effect.That helps in maintaining life in our planet. If the content increases, then the amount of light and heat from the sun getting trapped in our atmosphere increases leading to a higher temperature.Higher carbon content will block sun light and heat. That will be ice age. Our higher consumption of energy from carbon fuels increases the carbon content in the atmosphere. At the moment, we are seeing the first phase where the carbon acts like a trap and more heat is retained in our atmosphere. This increases our temperature in our atmosphere. That affects a lot of happenings in our atmosphere. Climate gets affected. That is a problem affecting the livelihood of billions of people.
Monsoons become erratic. It became a global problem not a local problem like air pollution.When atmospheric temperature goes up, glaziers melt and sea level rises leading to submersion of a large land area. Mumbai and Chennai will be affected. So all are concerned. If the monsoon becomes erratic, our agriculture is at stake and our life is more at stake.
So the world is worried and many governments want to reduce the added carbon in our atmosphere. The world is keen on a carbon reducing economy.
Let us look at another pollution that affects our agriculture- soil pollution. I talked about the salinity problem in TB dam area, reducing cultivable area and livelihood. 
Another major problem is garbage disposal.We see a pollution multiplier effect in the thoughtless way municipalities dispose their garbage- landfill approach. This leads to leaching- leakage into the soil of harmful chemicals and bacteria. This further leads to ground water pollution. water becomes saline and non potable. The air in the area becomes polluted. People become sick frequently. Land is not usable for agriculture.
The soil is further polluted by fertilizers and pesticides residues coming from the fields.
So we destroy the treasures of nature and make life painful and unhealthy.
What are the solutions?
Greetings. Dks
22/01/26, 3:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 963
There are no easy solutions. There are many hurdles.
1.understanding the full picture of pollution. It is a multidimensional problem. Pollution depends on several parameters like lifestyle, consumption patterns, mindset- ignore it-, energy sector, population, industry approaches,non availability of easy solutions, land availability etc.
2. Willingness to start corrections. Belief in cleanliness is godliness is disappearing. Most don't want to address this ,don't consider this an urgent problem and don't want to change their lifestyle,their mode of spending and living. Today convenience is the key.
3. People think in one dimension and in binary. This shows why many parts of villages are not clean. 
4. The corrections actions are complex, need cooperation from several sections of people. We need not a solution, but a new culture drastically changing our beliefs,our activities, our efforts etc. Even temples need a change.
5. There is no clarity or holistic understanding of the problems of nature, their connections, their dynamics, time constants etc. We don't understand the irreversible effects of climate change.We are not able to predict properly the path taken by a cyclone in the bay of Bengal. Our mathematics is still not strong enough to model climate systems.
6. Political will is missing. 
7. While industries have their supporters and godfathers, nature is orphan. A few activists do part-time shouting. So nature is forgotten till it starts hurting.
8. Pollution control and enrichment of nature are the last items in our political, scientific, social and economic agendas.
All the above factors bring out the following aspects about the environment problem:
1.It is not a one dimensional technical problem. Technical solutions weren't accepted easily.
2.It is a culture change problem. Bring people back to clean and nature centric living. This is the key to solving environmental problems. Every sub problem meets with resistance from policy planners to executives to users. Our mind set is totally fixed to materialism. We discarded culture. We don't see culture in development, technology ,economics. We see culture is related to social life only- festivals,food,arts, practices etc.
That separation approach worked in a static society. But society as seen even in the 1980s was a changing society- consumption was increasing, demands were going up, resources were depleting,scarcity was not accepted, technology wanted more resources, money and wealth were important.
But in reality, culture can be defined as our common, not individual, belief system- commonly accepted beliefs on money, profits,development, the general economy, business,ethics etc. Let us call this as a professional system which is responsible for the problems to nature. We have two systems - social and professional. Culture change is tough not done by technology but by education and slow mindset changes.
The professional systems are focused on outcomes- profit, productivity, growth etc not on the internals or the processes. Processes are tuned for profit. We need a change here. Go for Gita's Nishkama karma - don't look at results. Do your duty.
So my problem is defined
Arrest attacks on nature.and 
Enrich nature.
The solution involves wisdom not just knowledge. You should know how to avoid or take care of the hurdles and go forward.
The Solution approach for enrichment of nature has two components. One to educate and convert people. Second is a series of actions. 
I operated on both fronts. Education aspect was addressed through introducing environment education in schools, popular seminars, world environment day seminars and exhibition etc. I spent the entire world environment day by participating in seminars in several organizations in Bangalore. In addition, we conducted world environment day as an exhibition and seminar in six cities - Mysore,Mercara,Mangalore,Sirsi,Hubli, and Shimoga. I visited three cities - Sirsi, Hubli and Shimoga with my family and participated in seminars. We also initiated steps to include environment subject in the school curriculum. Many NGOs started looking at environmental aspects of the state.
We also funded projects for studies in the universities and even coop societies like the Hulgol cooperative society.
Let me look at the second approach in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
23/01/26, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 964
While the actions to reduce pollution were restricted to regulatory and legal ones, the real solutions are still eluding us. Treatment technologies have improved and become cost effective. But we are a peculiar country. We have too many regulatory agencies like inspector of factories, municipal licensing, electricity inspector, safety and fire inspector and pollution control. I am not sure the regulators are effective. Also corruption plays a role. We haven't fully addressed the pollution problems even today. Dr Gita Gopinath gave an estimate of death due to pollution to a million plus. The problem is serious even now.
We initiated several actions on enrichment- that again on two fronts. One was to minimize consumption in several sectors, and the other to go for an alternate resource. Let me look at one example - cooking.
Cooking activity affects all. In 1981, the most prevalent form was cooking on a wood stove using firewood. Most canteens,messes, and hotels used firewood for cooking. What are the effects?
1. While part of the firewood was collected from local neighborhood by poor villagers, many others depend on firewood from forests. This has many secondary impacts.
2. Forests were getting depleted fast. As I said earlier, Bangalore city got its firewood from Kanakapura,a distance of 60kms, in the sixties-1960 , but by the eighties, Bangalore had to get its firewood from shimoga and Uttara Kannada forests, from a distance of 400 to 500kms. This meant that firewood needed to come from high biodiversity rich forests and transported over long distances by trucks and trains. You needed high quality diesel energy to do this job.
3. Most wood stoves were very inefficient. For every unit of energy used by food, you had to input ten units. If we increased the efficiency of stoves, the firewood consumption would come down by half. We would reduce deforestation considerably.
As I said before, we identified two approaches
Use alternate fuels- solar cookers, bio-gas for cooking
Supply high efficiency wood stoves.
We initiated actions on both fronts. We encouraged setting up bio-gas plants through financial subsidies and also conducting research to improve the design and operation of the bio digester process. The responses were very good.
We got KIMPCO to manufacture simple solar cookers. We popularized these cookers. But it didn't pickup. 
The second path-We looked at high efficiency wood stoves. CPRI had come up with a new stove with efficiencies in the range of 20% whereas the traditional stoves used by villagers had an efficiency of 10%. So use of this new stove would reduce firewood consumption by 50%
So I decided to popularize this stove. We agreed to pay the cost of 100 stoves to be manufactured and distributed. CPRI couldn't manufacture this stove. 
Fortunately I found a person interested in manufacturing this stove. Mr Sankarasubramanian, who was running a garage, met me to invite me to a seminar on the environment by rotary club. I focused my talk there on the problem of firewood scarcity, low efficiency cooking stoves and mentioned the CPRI stove. After my lecture, Mr Sankarasubramanian showed interest in taking up manufacturing the stove.I put him in touch with Mr Jayaraman of CPRI. They signed a contract. Since he had a workshop, he started manufacturing the stoves. He called it priagni. It became very popular and distributed across the country. This was a success story.
Mr Sankarasubramanian became a good friend for two decades. I started advising him on many matters and participated in his campaigns to sell the stove. 
Greetings. Dks
24/01/26, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 965
A city-state comes to be for the sake of life, but it continues to be for the sake of living well. 
Aristotle, Politics, Book One.
During the eighties and nineties period, both the Indian and Karnataka governments focused on converting most wood stoves into ones with high efficiencies.  It was a massive activity. The first step was to get high efficiency, reliable, proven, and easy to use stoves developed. The governments funded projects.Many institutions worked on stoves to increase the efficiencies of stoves. Many models were developed and tested.
One of the best stoves was devised by Prof Kumar, Prof Lokras and their group at IISc.They found out the heat losses in stoves and designed a stove called ASTRA ole. It had an efficiency of over 30%. This happened around 1984-85. Karnataka government approved this stove and entrusted its popularization to KSCST. A large number of training programs for masons were conducted both at the state level and at district level. Many engineers were selected by KSCST and stationed in districts for conducting regular training programs, for supervising the construction work ,for trouble shooting and for providing feedbacks.It was a great arrangement. Prof KS Jagadish was enthusiastic about this program and guided it along with Prof Kumar and Lokras. 
This program of popularising high efficiency stoves worked because of the following:
1. Total understanding of human behaviors and acceptability. The usage doesn't change from the tradition. No new skills to be learnt. No new cooking techniques to be learnt.
Detailed thinking and planning of the entire process.
2. Facilitation process- stoves made available, skilled masons available to build, trouble shooting was done by an engineer
3. Good feedback mechanism
4. Financial subsidy.
Then I took another major activity. Planting trees everywhere in a scientific way in order to create a tree culture amongst farmers. 
We campaigned against eucalyptus trees. I visited Urulikanchan near Pune where Bharatiya agriculture foundation was experimenting by implementing new ideas.
I saw them experimenting with a fast growing babul tree and showed a good success. We took it up in karnataka. The program was handled by the development commissioner and all districts were involved in this program. 
We found that Bijapur could replicate the tree plantation successfully. We visited Bijapur and found out that the treatment of seeds with rizhobium helped in the faster growth. We decided to conduct a training program for all officers in charge of district rural development projects and the principal agricultural officers. I went with the development commissioner and conducted the training program. 
The program had mixed success. It was successful in north Karnataka and not successful in south Karnataka. 
We used the NSS program of the universities, funded NSS camps and focused the camps on environment- awareness of better efficient stoves, use of solar energy, tree planting etc. I visited many camps.
Greetings. Dks
25/01/26, 5:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 966
I have covered most of my activities, but not all, on environment during my the period 1981. The effects of our actions were mixed- some were successes and some, mostly pollution focused ones, were failures. But I learnt a lot.
Let me look at how these transformed me - my understanding of the real, diverse and dynamic world.
First thing is, it allowed me to travel through a sequence of problems from beginning to end. I first understood the reality to a larger depth through readings, discussions and visits- all three played a significant role in understanding the reality- what is happening, why it is happening, how it is happening, who are involved in it,who are affected,what are the mindsets and motivations of people concerned, what are the difficulties, why the difficulties are not addressed, etc. I got a good picture of the reality of the main problem that I looked at. I saw a whole new world- away from the world of teachers, students and engineers. I created a mental map of the complex universe of the problem. This step is missed by most and even rejected by many. 
Let me give examples from the IT sector. A bank wants a solution to a problem, say it wants a core banking solution in the early 2000. How the bank goes about this problem .
The bank officers know the banks procedures, but had no tacit knowledge - not theoretical knowledge- of the market. 
It floats a tender. The tender has a lot of details about the functionalities to be performed by the software. There are a few vendors who respond. Discussions go on between both sides. The tender is awarded to one vendor.Then both face problems in execution. I had seen tussles, complaints, misunderstandings happening in several instances. Most banks are vendor driven. Some bank officers were smart, picked  up some depth of knowledge of the software and suggested modifications. There are two Kumars who were very good. But that didn't help. I saw Oracle dictating to the CMD of banks. Banks yielded to Oracle's demands.
This shows the need to build a total picture of the situation- user side like banks, technology side, vendor capabilities, banks role, vendor role, conflict resolution,alternate paths etc.
I had seen hundreds of user vendor misunderstandings leading to hot words and dissatisfactions. Users can't change vendors. It is even now vendors raj.
I had discussed the details of the Mahithisindu program of improving computer literacy in 1000 high schools. We built a complete map, identified gaps, identified vendor weaknesses in the beginning. So that helped us to build a detailed action plan. Our implementation had hiccups, but it was a success. We planned well detailing all steps, activities,and requirements and put it in paper upfront. I should say it was not easy, but there was no political interference there. But political pressure was high.Two companies cooperated well. One didn't.
I said that we should have tacit wisdom. What is that - knowledge about your problem, possible solutions, companies offering solutions, their competences, the maturity of their products, the dependability and stability of the company, fall back options, growth options, time expectations, quality of service, agility of changes, rework, redesign, security and confidentiality, ease of use etc. This is extensive. In the case of banks, they didn't have the time or expertise or capability of balanced and unbiased assessments. That is a reality. So the capability limits of both sides should be understood. 
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
26/01/26, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 967
In order to construct a complete universe of a situation correctly and effectively, we need to get a lot of information, analysis and tacit wisdom. It is a major thinking, and action based learning activity.To perform these we need some characteristics in ourselves.
The problem of constructing a universe of the environment in Karnataka needed the following characteristics:
Open mind, clarity of thought and actions, looking at the whole before parts- top down approach,look outside and beyond constraints and create a picture, gather tacit knowledge,assess without biases and past knowledge, braveness to discard beliefs and even theories- break the boundaries. We get knowledge in parts. We don't get holistic, unbiased, unconstrained and integrated knowledge - that is called wisdom. Our formal education misses it completely. It has become a total parental responsibility which most parents today don't understand and don't fulfill it. It needs to be built from childhood.
Fortunately, I had a fascination for people and world from childhood. All my readings of books increased my knowledge about people, their habits, behaviors, beliefs and interactions. I got a great picture in my high school days. That was extremely useful for me in addressing these problems in a holistic, people oriented, unbiased, sympathetic and balanced manner without value judgements.
Let me look at them in some detail.
1.open mind- see inside and definitely outside.Remove your assumptions and biases. Don't be too narrow focused. Have a universe of the environment in your view. Accept good statements even if they are wrong in principle. For example, Foresters and ecologists talk of multi-species cultivation of trees. But we propagated subabul, a single specie,because our motive was to get more firewood available in the neighborhood so that forests are saved. It wasn't to regenerate a degraded forest. Open mind looks around a lot. It gets knowledge from every where.
2. clarity of thought. 
In the first stage of understanding a problem, don't worry about processes, technologies, resources, culture of the organization, structures, implementation etc. These will be filled up later.
Clarity of a problem, which is not a technical one, is not easy. It is required to convert data into tacit knowledge. We need many habits to gain clarity of a problem:
Humility- I don't know anything.
Curiosity- to know more in depth and understand. As soon as a child is born, it wants to know what is happening around it within a few days. It starts exploring the room, the house, the outside, the climate, the people,their activities etc. Within a year, the child accumulate a lot of knowledge about its small universe. That is due to curiosity.By age three or four, it asks questions to understand, first from parents, and later from others. It listens. Listening is an adjunct characteristic to curiosity. In villages, a child of four listens to what people are talking and discussing in the houses and in the 'thinnais' of many houses and builds its understanding. Its mind develops well by then. 
Concentration
Contemplation: I built this practice of spending 15 to 30 minutes every day reviewing my work and thinking about what to do in the coming days. I used to mull on lectures. I used to read books, then contemplate on the material. I enlarged my knowledge through reading a lot of books and recapping on them.
Listening
Multidimensional thinking- intense thinking without constraints, without science and technology, without negative thoughts.
Looking at multiple sources- people, articles, visits, discussions,books etc. Gather tacit knowledge. Expertise doesn't help in the start of a problem. It helps only in building the parts.
Analysis
Pursuit
I have seen several people in my life with a phenomenal clarity of thought to construct a complete universe of a situation. If you head an organization, you need clarity. I saw it in Dr Bhabha, Dr Sarabhai, Prof Dhawan, Mr Schumachar,Prof R Narasimha, Prof AKN,Prof Madhav, Prof Ramaseshan,Mr FCK,Mr S Ramadorai , Mr Chandra, and many others. Gandhi had a remarkable clarity about the country in depth on various aspects like poverty, caste, education, industrialization etc. Nehru had a biased, one directional clarity - a clarity based on Soviet philosophy.
Clarity is a practice,a daily practice. It is an exercise. I recall one technique/experiment about getting clarity. Sometimes, you talk to someone and your sibling or parent observe it from a distance and when you go to them, they will ask for details of the conversation- what did the elder say and what was your response. This has three advantages: the child can recap, can abstract the talk, the parent can protect the kid from abuses- I got a lot of it in childhood, my father and grandmother protected me,but my uncle knew that I was mature enough to handle that-, the parent knows about the child better and understands him or her better. 
Similarly, parents, mostly mothers, ask their children on return from school the standard question: what happened in the school? What did you learn? etc. The understanding and bonding increases. The child learns to think and recap.
Another approach is to read newspapers and a lot of books and magazines every day. When I say read ,I don't mean - read and forget. I mean - read, recap, abstract, analyze, add to your picture of the world, review it. That is reading. That is what I did and do throughout my life. I read a variety of books, not for entertainment but for building a picture of the world as seen by us. Understanding the world is one of the main functions of our life. We build this understanding every day. If you build a clear and correct picture, your clarity is good.
Clarity improves through good practices of thinking,abstraction and conscious actions every day. Contemplation for at least 15 minutes every day on the days happenings and reviewing the good and bad will increase clarity.
We will continue other requisites in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
27/01/26, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 968
Let me look at the next requirement for problem solving.
3.Look at the whole before the parts. 
Build connections. Look at the problem architecture. 
We need to realize one important fact. 
No organization stands alone. 
All organizations, activities, successes, failures, growth or death or regeneration depend heavily on people, society and the economy. We ignore them.
If your universe is a bank under consideration, don't start looking at credit or deposits- they are parts.  We used bottom up approach in designing the core banking software and it led to poor design, difficulties of adapting to our conditions, problems of modification and operational inflexibility. Don't try to find out the answer to the question - what is a bank? It deals with the past. It is inward looking and not holistic. We should ask - what should be a bank?Mr MBN Rao, CMD of Indian bank and later Canara bank, said - 'all aspects of money is my business.'But we didn't go very far in achieving that objective.We are still far behind.
Financial gateways, a connection mechanism, was not understood by the banks in the 2000 period. When it was focused, we got a game changer - UPI and easy payment systems. Understanding rural users led to a better design of financial inclusion through imfast device.
Understand the objectives of a bank, its connections to outside- economy, humans and their behavior, businesses, commerce,technology etc. Build a connectivity diagram. Then look at internal and functional connections and flows. Build an architecture now. Clarity and open mind helps in building this picture.Even now we don't address the enterprise bus design.
Banks don't look at the way businesses have changed in the 21st century, don't understand the digital economy, green economy and AI economy and their impacts.
Banks have a large volume of data on transactions. With UPI, they get data on spending, but no analytics is getting done by the banks. They can help ecommerce companies with data analytics.
All these will happen if one sees the connections.
When ecommerce companies looked at functions only, they failed. When customer preferences on cost, better information on products, better services like tracking, return possibilities, speed etc- all external factors- were understood,and the system was re architected, the companies succeeded.
Designers understand a system and look at its implementation and may look across disciplines, but it was still inward looking. A good example is the design of a data centre- one looks at power, communications, air conditioning, business continuity,security etc. When Cray designed his supercomputer, the major problem he encountered was heat dissipation, not just computer design. Database designers looked at physical transactions and built a transactions processing system. They invented commit, acid properties and audit trail to take care of some physical issues.
This is our weakest level of intelligence. We start going into details. We see the tree not the forest. We see the activities in the house and not the behaviors of society or the mood of the village.
Most of us are trained to look at parts and not the whole. This behavior has made us prisoners of known things, makes us nervous about challenges. We don't want to venture out. We don't want to even know the outside.We are happy to be in our comfort thinking zone. That is mediocrity.
That is dangerous, making us slaves. Please come out of this parts syndrome. Look at the whole. Architect the connections. Don't worry about details. It will come later.
This suggestion for change is tough to follow when you are trained through your formal education to go for focusing on detailing the parts. When you join a job, you are assigned to look at a part and no one tells you the whole picture. I have several examples of this. 
Most students join IT companies as coders and when I talked to them after say 10 years, they didn't know what was going on in their company, what is the future direction of the country, how technology is moving and how his or her company works. The most important learning for a person is not programming, but understanding the business and culture of the company or organization.I felt sad. Curiosity was missing.
The fourth requirement is coming up next.
Greetings. Dks
28/01/26, 3:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 969
Let us look at some comments:
Mr H S Nagaraja, Kirloskar
"Need of the hour is that we seriously think of implementing " Human making education system" which Swamy Vivekananda profoundly advocated way back in last century.Sustainable development suggested by the international experts with the view that the sustainable development  meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the needs of the future generations.Can we properly integrate & implement the NEP with Indian system of knowledge & wisdom.?Expressed some thoughts (based on  reading  some articles of experts in the field & my understanding ) for your kind perusal and reaction.Thanks, with regards:Nagaraja H S"
Needs a detailed response. Will do it later.
A quick answer is we give partitioned knowledge in our west based education with NEP, not holistic. We ignore wisdom. So Maxwell says 
We need a revolution in education. 
Mr Ajay Misra,GM(IT),PNB
"Your write up takes me back to the year of 2001 -3 when we struggled to put Core banking in our bank. It will be interesting to follow this series of thoughts. Regards.  Ajay Misra"
Dr TKM Babu
"Absolutely true.Thanks"
Thanks for your comments.
Mr Srinivasan, GM, PNB, commented on my point in the post 968 over the phone. He said that point applies to all, not just coders. 
I agree with his statement. But the resistance I got to the idea of whole before parts is unbelievable. Even recently, I discussed this concept regarding the future directions of a company. Many protested my statement. They felt
It is vague. They don't understand. Show me an example.
They are doing right. No need to go for this.
It puzzled me and even hurt me.
Let me give you another struggle I had. That was with respect to the development of curriculum. I was with several academic councils of several colleges, NITs and universities. I had a running feud on this concept. All colleges were happy doing a minor tinkering of their curriculum. No one wanted a holistic ab initio look and restructuring of their curriculum. I had struggled with this aspect in hundreds of meetings. I had success with only one person- Prof MNC at KREC, Suratkal. He gave me freedom to revamp the curriculum.
My third struggle was with banks. All banks went for a core banking software. But none looked at a holistic structure of problems of the bank, business constraints, regulations, user accounting, user services etc. At the time of going in for core banking, the banks didn't think of net banking and mobile banking. For a good design of netbanking, we needed to understand interactions,user understanding and user responses. There was no understanding of the implications. There was no time to think. I recall several instances where oracle forced banks to buy their products.
There are many more instances that I can illustrate,but hope this is enough. Internal firefighting destroyed most hardware companies in India. 
Greetings and thanks. Dks
29/01/26, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.   970
Let me return to my discussion on the necessary qualities and mindsets required to solve a large problem correctly.
4. Another associated requirement to solve a problem- to discover problems particularly- is to have a futuristic view and futuristic vision and thinking. Science to a large extent lives in the known world. But our real world is changing. So we need to look at a changed world in the next ten years. So futuristic viewing is a mandatory requirement. Otherwise we will end up as a follower never a pioneer. 
Prof Clayton Christensen talked of disruptive innovation. One of the main reasons is a myopia of vision - not knowing what is happening in the world and what the future trends are and how they will change our organizations.
Consider the area- dev ops, a great concept applicable to operations in industries, schools, colleges,universities, banks, government departments, health and hospitals, agriculture and commerce units,-but the progress of research and development in this area is very slow. Very few are working in this area. It has a great transformative power. It will change our thinking and our processes,procedures and practices. But we ignore this. Dev ops is necessary for end to end looking and solving problems.
Let me give some examples. JN Tata was a pioneer on hydro power and steel and talent building. Sir MV saw the potential of irrigation, and its link to the environment. He made the farmers of Mandya district promise not to cultivate sugar cane and not to cut the trees in their fields.Bhabha had a futuristic vision of atomic energy, Sarabhai had a futuristic vision of satellites and launch vehicles. Swayambhu had a vision of power industry in India and BHELs role in it.FC Kohli was a pioneer moving into the unknown businesses of software and outsourcing. A true academic anticipates future trends in his area.
I don't want to list the pioneers abroad. There are a large number of inventors. GE is a good example of survival. Google pioneered search engines.
When I say futuristic vision, I am not even talking about why new inventions are not happening in India. I am talking about the survival of our companies. The failure of HCL,PSI and Wipro in the hardware field is due to this stagnation in futuristic thinking.
Despite knowing fully well that electronics killed several industries, and computers killed many, we still live in ignorance of the future. How many use block chain, IOT, cloud etc in their organizations. These are current tech not future tech.
One main reason is our attachment to the old. We don't discard old technologies. Our early auto industries suffered from this syndrome.
The protected economy made us shy away from risks and stay in the old areas and not venture into new unknown areas. So we remain followers. But we should be the first followers of new trends- avoid time delays. That is happening in AI today.
I have been looking at fin tech for more than two decades. But the progress of fin tech is not satisfactory. I looked at several books on the future of fin tech. Unfortunately they all talk of the past, not the future. Fin ops is evolving, but still in a primitive state. It is not practiced in India. Still I am yet to see a fin arch- financial architecture. When Samba Murty was the director of IDRBT, we discussed this aspect. I even made a draft.In every organization, we are in a fire fighting mode. Futuristic planning will lead to pioneers.
5. We need to understand that problem definition is not a simple mathematical exercise. It is a balanced tacit wisdom exercise. It is dependent on people and their intra and interpersonal relationships and behaviors. Dr Atul Gawande calls it ineptitude- you know how to solve a problem in theory but don't know how to go about it. All of us build tacit knowledge- not quantifiable, may not be connected, not applicable everywhere uniformly- from childhood and analysis based on it is wisdom. Miss Marple of Agatha Christie is a great example. Hercule Poirot is another example. Jeeves is a good problem solver.
6. Detective work- The main job in problem solving is discovery -
Of the universe 
Of the problems encountered
Of the gaps
Of the future trends
Of obstacles
Of the possible solutions and changes etc.
So every activity is a discovery.
Greetings. Dks
30/01/26, 4:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 971
That completes one major chapter of my learnings on the problems of the environment. Later I generalized that learning and applied it to define the requirements needed for problem solving in many sectors like IT, steel, space, hospitals,institutions, banks, education, government,construction etc.
I did a detailed description so that most of us understand problem solving holistically. I had this opportunity of working on people's problems directly and most academics don't get this opportunity. This broadened my vision, made me know the intricacies of human and societal problems and our role. It made me a wiser person.I have got a public role now.
I started with a good exposure to large practical problems immediately after BE with the design of a substation. I was totally unaware of how to go about it, but didn't back out. I read books, talked to people, saw a substation and built an idea in mind. That wasn't a mathematical problem.
Then I worked on power systems. It was a pure mathematical and computational problem. 
Next, I got into power distribution problems. It was a pathless path. I formulated a problem and modeled it with heuristics. It was a multi model complex problem. 
Next was my Bedthi power plant redesign, and my rural energy systems planning and design. This involved knowing not just the technical and economic aspects, but also the societal angle. It thrust me into multi dimensional problem solving methods. Still it was in my domain. 
But this problem of enriching the environment was not in my domain and involved people and government.I was happy I did something there. It enriched me definitely and created a new dimension of reality in me. 
During this period, I continued my association with TCS and PSTI. My interactions with Dr Nirmal Jain increased. One idea germinated in my mind. It was automation of COBOL programs through a generator. This will improve the accuracy and productivity. I put two students, Mr Garg and Mr Menon, on this task- to build a generator for commercial batch applications. They were working and I discussed it with Nirmal. He liked the idea. I designed a generator language called sysgel for TCS.
I had a kind of experience at TCS.At that point of time, FCK was well known in CSI and academic circles. Nirmal was cultivating friendships with many academics. That was necessary for campus recruitment. Campus recruitment started to pick up by late seventies though Tata Electric was doing it even in the sixties, but not regularly.Since TCS had a demand for more engineers , it started regular campus interviews and selections mostly from IITs and IISc and mainly ME and MTech students. Tata Burroughs also started campus selections.
There used to be competitions between both on day one slot. Initially ,the interviews were rigorous , but slowly their confidence went and they selected a large number of graduating students.Nirmal visited for TCS and Hebbalkar for Burroughs. So a big competition was going on for several years. I used to talk to Dr Mahishi and got day one slot for TCS. I saw the drama by Hebbalkar. He wouldn't sit, but kept walking and questioning the students. It was a proven technique to destroy the calm atmosphere.
I talked to FCK about increasing the catchment of TCS to BE/BTechs of IITs/IISc and later to other institutions. He agreed to slowly open up the recruitment.
But most other TCSers had no interactions with outside- academics or professional societies. TCS was almost a closed house.
More on TCS later.
Greetings. Dks
31/01/26, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 972
And of course, as we grow older, our quota of difficult moments increases too. However, at the same time, experience has given us the means to overcome those defeats and find a path that will allow us to carry on. We need to include that on our mental video as well.
Paulo Coelho    Maktub
Let me continue with my interactions at TCS. Most associates were intelligent and hard working. They were committed to their projects and they wanted to learn different types of machines, OS etc and so eagerly moved from project to project. There was a great urge for learning. They lived in the present and didn't bother about the future. 
I discussed with many about going for databases. I found resistance from most. Still, I decided to give lectures on data bases. About ten people attended. Interest was there, but time wasn't there.
As I said they wanted hands on experience on whatever technologies were existing and applied in projects, but didn't want to look at the changes that were happening- mainframe to mini, pascal and C becoming prominent, PCs coming in, client server model becoming dominant. You see the eighties were ushering in new architectures, new areas like software engineering, data bases, performance measurements etc. I was working on online distributed transactions processing at that time. Most TCS Indian projects were batch processing COBOL projects. Most TCSers were inward driven. But there were some who were seeing the trends happening. Mr FCK talked about microprocessors lab. But Mrs Gandhi didn't permit import of computers.
Mr FCK wanted to set up a research centre for software engineering. He had some rounds of discussions with me. Then ,he brought Prof EC Subba Rao as director and set up the Tata RDD centre in TMTC, Pune. That has grown so big today. 
Prof EC Subba Rao asked me to visit his centre along with my family. His intention was to make me join TRDDC and he wanted to find opportunities for my wife. He knew my interests in rural technologies. So I went to Pune with my family, and stayed there for two days. 
I visited the centre and had a series of discussions with him. We had very extensive and interesting conversations on a wide range of topics. He arranged some visits for my wife. I visited a few villages where Tatas were working on rural development. But the most interesting was my visit to Mr Salunkye, who headed an organization called Pani panchayat. I thought it was a great concept. Pani panchayat distributes the water available in a village with equal distribution to all residents. Those who had land can buy extra water from those who had no land and wantes to sell their water rights. He appointed a water distributor and a panchayat at the village level to resolve disputes. He had implemented it in about 200 villages in Purandar tehsil. It was a drought prone area I felt that it should be experimented in karnataka also. 
I also visited the Bharatiya Agro industries foundation at Uruli kanchan . BAIF opened my eyes. They were doing a lot of work on agricultural machinery. They experimented with livelihood schemes for marginal farmers.I was impressed with their work.
I was reluctant to move to Pune. I was on leave from IISc then and was with the state government. I didn't want to burn my IISc boat and joinTata RDD centre. I could do better research at IISc, I could teach and get involved with social and environmental activities. Bangalore offered me a lot of scope. I didn't see any advantage in Pune. 
We took the Deccan queen and reached Bombay. I met Nirmal and told him that I won't be interested in joining TRDDC and would continue my association with TCS. He accepted my views.
Greetings. Dks
01/02/26, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 973
After TCS, let me look at my engagement with PSTI which was very active. I was lecturing there regularly. I knew Mr GV Anantharamiah, Mr NSR Rao, Mr Venkatakrishna, Mr Magudapathy, Mr Taranath and many others. The car driver, Mr Khan, and the van driver,Mr Yusuf, became very friendly to me.  In short,I knew everyone there and all liked me. I became part of PSTI. I am saying this because, I lost my friend, Mr TCA Annavaradan, and both Mr Narasimhan, director and GV Rao,deputy director were transferred and the set up was new. I wasn't sure of the response. But I didn't have to worry. The relationship became better and closer. The same continued for the next ten years.
Let me turn to my family.I encountered one small problem in May June 81. My son completed UKG from Kishore Kendra school and I wanted to admit him in KV IISc where my daughter was studying. I submitted my son's application along with the institute's certificate that I continue as an employee of IISc. Still some members of the committee raised an objection that I wasn't in the institute. I told them ,' I will return to IISc. My job is at IISc and not in the government.' So my son got admission in KV. His schooling was taken care of.He was going to school with his sister and another four children- Madhav's and SPG's children. So he had company and friends. Childhood was good. 
I found him very active and with a mind of his own. He didn't obey us some times.Let me explain one incident here. 
During my stay with the government,I visited several places, many were forest areas like Bandipur, Nagarhole and Mercara. I visited Sirsi, Bhairumbe, Yellapur and Hubli.I took my family everywhere as it would be an exposure of people to them and a great education. I feel that I spent a lot of time with my family during this period. My son was attached to our driver a lot. He wanted to be with him.
When I visited Mercara, I stayed in the guest house at Harangi dam. I was walking on the top of the reservoir with several officers, my children were walking with my wife. Suddenly my son broke free and started running in that place.It was a high plateau and I panicked, ran and caught him. It wasn't a pleasant experience. 
Actually, I took my family to many places, including Pune and Bombay. Later we visited Kemmana Gundi, Adi Chunchunagiri. They experienced travel by crowded buses. They had visited Mysore and Madras often. Later they visited Kolkatta, Delhi and Simla. So they had a great idea of India.
It was time to decide on the upbringing of my children. I had a fantastic childhood which built me into what I am and taught me the world and its dynamics. 
Let me recap on my upbringing. 
1.Home environment is essential to build a good, calm person. It helps a child to concentrate.
2.I knew that education happens at home. You learn many concepts like cleanliness, routine living, time management, respect to elders, listening carefully, diligence, contemplation, prayer, proper food habits, simplicity,etc.. I learnt many values and practiced them.
3.I knew that the next level of education happens in the society- relatives,neighbors, friends,elders, farmers, priests, vedic scholars, visitors, shop keepers and others with whom you come in contact. This is tacit learning, not instruction based. You should use your mind to learn. This makes you think and use your mind. I learnt to listen, be quiet and helpful. I listened to the talks in the thinnai and bathing steps in the village tank in the village.
4.I learnt a lot from rituals, festivals, temple functions, samskaras happening in the village. I learnt from news articles about the country.
5. Another important source is books. I read a lot of fiction.I didn't read for entertainment. The fiction books built a detailed view of life in different parts of the country.I learnt a lot about people, their lifestyles, beliefs, habits and behaviors.
So I decided to train my children on similar lines. I decided to give them independence, freedom,responsibility and decision making powers. I didn't decide on their education after admitting them in KV. They decided.
Greetings. Dks
02/02/26, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 974
Let us see some comments.
Dr TKM Babu
"Good morningYour view is   correct.After main frame computers mostly by IBM ,  mini computers by DEC ,Wang computers,  were popular in industry and educational institutions where main computers were costly for their applications.The development of powerful comparatively cheap microcomputers were so fast that these companies could not predict. They went out of business. WE can call this also destructive innovation.In your  view Dr DKS, could they have prevented this ?Thanks Mahendra Babu👍🙏
My brief response
India used mainframes from CDC, IBM, Burroughs and later DeC10. We didn't use Wang. We used PDP/11, HP at IIM Ahmadabad and ECIL minis manufactured in Hyderabad. 
While the initial pioneers,DCM and ORG didn't stay longer, we had a strong long term showing by a few companies like Wipro and HCL and a medium term operations by several companies like PSI, Eiko,CMC,Sunray,Zenith, PCS, NELCO and a short term by some companies like Pertech, Keonics, Uptron,ESPL etc. So it is clear that many came forward. Even TVS and Kirloskar tried manufacturing, but it didn't work.
There were many assemblers selling unbranded computers at a lower price. IISc supported some of them. One company I know well is Taurus. Most assemblers couldn't cope with change and couldn't import latest technology parts. Their enthusiasm was great and they worked very hard.
Electro systems associates started by Gopinadham and Rajanikanth concentrated on selling microprocessor kits to colleges and survives even now.
First, we should recognize the fact a number of companies jumped into the hardware market and persisted with hardware supplies.For about 20 years, both HCL and Wipro stood firm in our computer market. They produced servers and built PCs. They moved quickly into the latest developed processors very well. Both did a good job. I bought computers from all these companies listed above.
They survived till 2005, more than 20 years. I won't say they are failures. But there were many reasons for them to move out of hardware.
The eighties saw Intel going fast with new processors starting with 8085 to Pentium. Then came mother board and IO controllers, VME or multibus concepts. So adaptation was not easy. Our companies had no collaboration. They had a tough blind task of designing new systems.
Software services gave a very high profit. Hardware profit margins were low. Struggles were high. Government policies didn't encourage faster innovation. There were only two designers- Raman in HCL and Sridhar Mitta in Wipro. So sustainability is a problem. 
Then came the most important problem- scaling. Foreign companies were producing millions of PCs where as Indian companies struggled to make a lakh. Scale gave a great price advantage to foreign companies. Indian companies didn't export PCs to other countries and so couldn't reach the scale. 
Also we didn't manufacture printers,keyboards, displays, disk drives, mother boards,buses ports,interfaces, memory etc. So every item was imported. There was a customs duty on them. So it wasn't easy to minimize the costs.
After liberalisation in 1991, we made mistakes. We had two companies in Bangalore manufacturing highend mainframe level computers- digital corporation and PSI Bull. I visited both and did a technology audit for PSI Bull.There was no business. It was a wrong time. When the world was going towards the client server model, there were not many buyers for these machines. So both companies closed down .
On the other side, IT was growing fast. Most companies and organizations wanted networking and software. Opportunities were quite high. Scaleup was easy. Profits were high. TCS and Infosys were doing well. So CMC moved into software first. Tatas left computer manufacture and focused on IT.
So both HCL and Wipro moved to IT services. Our Hardware business died. In 2005-2006 period, I was struggling to buy PCs and small servers for banks.
So I won't call this disruptive innovation. All were clear about their growth paths. 
Actually both HCL and Wipro set up separate companies. Wipro infotech set up wipro systems to develop software and struggled for over a decade. 
HCL set up several companies like HCL Comnet, HCL technologies etc. 
So both moved to IT services. It was a conscious decision to move into IT by both companies, not a failure, but a shift they were working on for decades.
I wasn't happy that we missed the hardware bus. I will blame government policies for this. 
How do you explain the strange situation- a country which built two digital computers in 1963 at TIFR and later at ISI and Jadavpur university missed the computer manufacturing route?The reasons are:
1. We never built a hardware foundry. So we couldn't produce VLSI chips, a big drawback. Malaysia produced chips in 2000. The one company- semiconductors India -died a fire death. The government ignored this sector till now.
2.Thailand with no culture imported chips and other components by kilos and sold them on the foot path ,this I saw in 1987. They produced manuals in Thai language to assemble computers.We couldn't import them.
3. Imports were the big hurdle.
4. Most hardware companies didn't realize that a computer is an integration of hardware and software. They ignored utilities,OS,compilers etc.
5.Except HCL and Wipro, other companies had a poor services unit. HCL was also good at sales.
 I bought Zenith's superbrain and Eikos 8 bit computers in early eighties.I bought a lot from HCL,Wipro and PCS. Now it is HP, Acer and Dell.
Greetings. Dks
03/02/26, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 975
Let me clarify my credentials to respond to Babu's query yesterday. 
I interacted with most manufacturers from 1970 onwards starting with Computronix and Hinditron and later ORG,Zenith,HCL, and still later others . 
I started helping in the purchase of computers by many organizations, educational institutions, government departments, banks, from 1970 onwards till 2020. I met almost all senior officers and sales people of the computer companies- hardware, networking, databases and software, manufacturing, system integration and services.
I was responsible for the purchase of thousands of servers and several tens of thousands of PCs. So I knew the pulse of computer industries and basic manufacturers abroad like Intel, CISCO, HP,IBM,Sun, and many others intimately. My comments are based on my experiences and thousands of interactions.
Let me look at more comments:
Debashish,TCS
It is very well written and thoughtful. A person with wide and practical experience only can come out with such thoughtful writings.
What all treasure of memories are floating around you, remarkably educative !!
Thanks Debashish.
Prof Basavarajiah, SIT,Tumkur
Sir It amazing that you have worked on diverse areas and you have left your imprint in all the fields you have worked A biography of yours will inspire the generations to come
Prof Vasudev Parvati
It is great to read about how you balanced your career between academia, government and industry which I'm sure provided you with a 360° perspective on educational priorities. Why is it that even today, in our IT domain industry academia partnership is still at a premium sir?
My response
Vasudev, you asked me a question that was a big concern for me for several decades. This topic is very close to my heart. But I didn't succeed in this mission of creating social understanding amongst our teachers and students. There are many reasons and let us see them. 
I saw a spark when I used faculty in 20 engineering colleges to conduct inspections in 1000 high schools in Karnataka and another interest when I organized the TBRP program in 10 colleges under our foundation,FAER. But both weren't enough.
Let me start with a few questions to teachers of science and engineering.
Should a person- engineer or Scientist - know about order in the universe ,not just order in matter?
Should a person - scientist or engineer- know the multidimensional nature of universe so that he can do meaningful activities relevant to reality?
Should a person learn theory and technical practices alone and not worry about applications and impacts?
How will a S and T education find solutions to the societal problems if it has no idea of society,nature and people? How will a person get knowledge of society?
Should a person know about the impacts of science and technology on a society, on people, their beliefs, their practices?
Should he not own the problems created by S and T on people and society and find solutions?
Should science and technology impose its restrictive materialist views on society and students?
Is education's purpose to create specialists only?
Should education be dogma oriented?
These questions should concern all people,not just teachers, but teachers have a deep responsibility. Even the recent budget looks at education as a partitioned set like STEM. Holistic approach is missing.
The answer to the above questions will tell us the importance of social understanding for all in today's complex and volatile world and more so for the problem solvers. It gives us an opportunity to solve the current problems of society and people correctly.
Let me continue in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
04/02/26, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post. 976

Let me establish my premise to socially sensitive- not politically- teaching and academics. I don't use terms like inclusive, but I strongly believe that all proposed engineering solutions by us should not be artificial or purely mathematical, but should be sympathetic to people, society, the environment and economy.
Towards that end, I believed in and followed four important - out based - principles that I should follow as a teacher.
1. Know your society, its problems and your responsibilities and efforts to address them as much as possible. This gives meaning to your teaching. This gives you fulfillment.
2. Know your people, their behavior, their mindsets, habits and culture. This makes you a good teacher. I call this tacit wisdom.
3. Know the reality of your current world- geopolitics, economy, living conditions, technologies, industries,business, opportunities, the good and evil of governance and society. This makes your teaching relevant and purposeful.
4. Make teaching inclusive, realistic and relevant. Don't make it only technical.
These four formed the basis for my activities. I believed in the Vedic statements.
'Shraddhaya deyam'- give and give with mindfulness and purpose.
'Paropakartam idam sareeram'- the body is for helping others.
What have I to give? Knowledge and solutions. I strived on that direction. I felt that Giving is my life purpose. I am doing it even now.
I have discussed certain qualities that teachers should build in themselves to understand the need for society education linkage and integration. Let me list some:
1. Open mind- look outside, get knowledge from every source,absorb them and reform yourself. Change your beliefs and habits. Fixed mindsets destroy us.
2.Holistic understanding. Look at connections and not the parts. Culture is an important connect to technology. The Economy impacts our life. We had very few millionaires in the 18th ,19th centuries. We see a large number of millionaires everywhere, even in villages. We see a lot of very rich people in villages. We also have a very large number of very poor people. So society is highly stratified and has a high degree of disparity. This leads to a great imbalance and many evil qualities like jealousy, hatred, violence etc. Since technology is responsible for some of these evils or even many of these, it is imperative that technology should address these issues. That means a holistic, interconnected understanding of people, society, the economy, commerce,business and technology necessary. So break the barriers, borders and fences.
3. A teacher's job is not information transfer, but to impart knowledge about reality and tacit wisdom. Focusing on technical or scientific topics alone is injurious to our education and children and our society. We build wrong materialistic values.
4. Be curious. Be innovative. Ask questions. Look beyond the known and look for unknowns. Holistic understanding will open up many pandora's boxes.
I tried my best,but didn't succeed in building an empathetic curriculum.
Let me trace a bit of history to understand this problem.
The social aspect of our life purpose was very high till the 18th century. Most people lived in similar circumstances - lower middle class and poor. There were very few rich people. So that created a strong bond and attachment. All village problems were settled by villagers. Religious activities were conducted by society. Festivals allow you to mix with others. Samskaras, like marriages, allowed one to feed others and others to help him. Most villagers respected death and showed their solidarity with the deceased family.Poor  children lived on vara oota- eating in one house every week.
So that ambiance built a homogeneous environment, a simpler reality ,a stronger attachment to religion,values and idealism and a greater purpose in life. It gave prominence to local problems, culture and religion.Society dominated ones thinking and actions.
Even in the 1940s when I was brought up, this consciousness of society, people, religion, values and nature was built in me very strongly. Those were still days filled with idealism and Gandhism.I lived in that kind of ethos and my reading a lot of social fiction imbibed in me a strong sense of empathy and responsibility to society. That gave me my first education.
Continued
Greetings
Dks
05/02/26, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 977
WHAT are the major, inner problems of people in our day? When we look beneath the outward occasions for people’s disturbances, such as the threat of war, the draft, and economic uncertainty, what do we find are the underlying conflicts? To be sure, the symptoms of disturbance which people describe, in our age as in any other, are unhappiness, inability to decide about marriage or vocations, general despair and meaninglessness in their lives, and so on.
Rollo May
But the situation of our society changed.We were in a state of isolation and poverty till the mid eighties. During this period 1960 to 1985, we were ideologically moved to the left- socialism or soviet-ism.  But the liberalization of the economy ushered us into a new global era. Post nineties, we unabashedly became materialistic and specialization oriented. But the 21st century gave us another series of turns. It was considered the anxiety era. Anxiety is monotonically increasing. It is not an easy period.
With AI, while blue collar jobs of carpenters,masons,electricians etc will not be affected, engineering will get a jolt ,a cyclone.So social and human solving of problems is more important than technical solutions. 
Is there a need for all of us to be society and people minded? Yes.It is clear from our discussions.Before I ask how, let me paint an IT picture seen by me in both 20th and 21st centuries. 
While IT focused on industries ,banks and organizations in the mid twentieth century, PCs changed it in two ways. 
One -PCs reached a large number of small organizations and their business depended on PCs. Client server was dominant.
Two- all activities were online and automatic. Stakeholders and employees interacted with computers and databases directly. Both data flow and workflow were automated. This led to user friendly systems.
But the internet, social networks, mobile and cloud changed everything in the 21st century. IT became people centric.
Also the 21st century led to changes, complexity, uncertainty and volatility. So life is different. 
Organizations will change structurally, people will decide the success of all of us,AI will try to control us with much better knowledge - a frightening situation. So get ready to throw everything we know and do overboard and pick up new things.
Education needs a rethinking,reworking and ,reimagination. No tinkering will work. How do we do it?
Let me take one example - psychotherapy.
How does a therapist learn?. His is not a science with fixed rules. His area changes. 
A therapist learns from his clients not from books. people are his primary source. He doesn't build bookish knowledge, but tacit wisdom.
So we should accept that engineering is a practice not just an application of physics and mathematics. Move away from that firmly entrenched belief/ faith.
I got my social concern by getting involved in societal problems, government's problems and organizations problems. I built my reality and tacit wisdom through involvements. It is not luck,but looking for practical problems, however complex and different they may be. I looked beyond borders, beyond computer science, energy and environment. Mathematics is a tool for me.Solutions come from people.
So teach tacit wisdom to students by getting into practice.NEP is not helpful here.
Social understanding should be a part of our system. Every organization should have social systems department. 
Change curriculum - introduce two to three courses on social and human systems. Focus on social problem solving not just technical solutions. 
Introduce training for teachers. 
Build case studies.
Teach human-based decision making.
Send students to government offices for internships,not industries. The students should build a case study.
Have at least one social project in our curriculum. It should be problem discovery oriented.
But sensitise all on the relevance of social empathy as an integral part of engineering and solutions will come through exposure to people and their responses.
Greetings. Dks
06/02/26, 3:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 978
More comments
Prof P Raja
"Sir,Your reflections—rooted in both your professional journey and personal experiences—truly stand out. Many of us tend to compartmentalize these aspects of life, but you have consistently drawn from both with clarity and purpose.What impresses me most is your deep sense of observation, coupled with an inquisitive and analytical mind that engages with every challenge meaningfully. From an early age, you have faced social and systemic issues with maturity, extracting valuable lessons and identifying solutions at  levels to your best.It is rare for anyone to grasp the trade of the trick so early in life, especially when so many external influences tend to distract people. Yet, you remained —stubborn in the best sense—resolved in your direction alongwith your values. Your family culture, early exposure, and ability to seize opportunities have seamlessly to shape your path and guide your entire career. It is inspiring to see how these foundations continue to reflect in your work and leadership.Thanks sir."
Thanks
Prof Karunakara
"Dear sir,We are always keep discussing why hardware industries not flourished in our country.  We found answers in your journey.    Lack of future visions and governments policies made us to fall behind. Our education is also not focused on how to solve problems. Recent social survey is also telling we are going backwards in our journey. Are we failing in taking challenges to move ahead? Pulling down our capabilities by   not imparting better education? Closing down of government schools is really hurting. It indicates what? Our policy of teachers recruitment failed? With everything free, we are not able to attract students. Please share your insights.Thanks and regards"
My response
You raised many relevant aspects.As I said earlier, education is a continuous life long process. It comes from hundreds of sources, not schools alone. 
But the purposes of education are 1.to know reality, 2. to define life's purpose, 3. to define goals and strategies, 4. to understand the proper ways of learning, 5. to get good habits and values to make a person a good human and to gather tacit wisdom.
How do we get it? By training from childhood. It is a hard way. There are no easy solutions. 
We need to create a positive pleasant ambiance in home, schools and colleges. That is what we had at IISc, a fantastic study ambiance,an opportunity to question and find answers,an atmosphere to read ,listen,contemplate and understand. This existed in the 1950s and 60s. We had dedicated teachers. But we destroyed those institutions by politicalising everything, recruiting uninterested teachers, encouraging mediocrity and destroying curiosity.
But there is a positive side. India is a diverse country. We see thousands accepting challenges despite the bad vibe in schools. Many of us can isolate ourselves from the neighborhood and perform outstanding work.We are resilient people. A little push, a few committed, sincere, non commercial institutions will help students. RSS is very committed even though many don't subscribe to their ideology. ABVP is producing political leaders that I expected from communism. 
That is why we produce hundreds and thousands of CEOs and political and spiritual leaders. Many have a strong thinking, analyzing and arguing- tarka- mind. So we move forward despite being saddled with a not great and relevant curriculum. 
But I hope that we, with the help of AI, will flatten our learning system. People anywhere in India will get access to infinite data and information with analysis. Today's AI gives one response to your queries. Tomorrow's AI will give many responses with detailed analysis of what may be accepted and what may be rejected. A child of today will be able to learn hundred times that of a child of yesterday by sitting at home. Books will be passe. Schools will be minimalistic in learning. But family has a much bigger role in creating values and leadership qualities.
The most important concern for me is:
This is not a time to relax.
There will a pralaya- a huge flood- sweeping us and drowning us. AI will subordinate and even destroy countries. Most won't know what to do, how to live and survive. Destruction looms large.
But don't worry. Solutions will be found by Indians.
So get ready. Move away from petty thinking and petty caste politics.
We have a lot of work to do. We have to build huge mental bridges to survive this flood. That needs millions of new age thinkers. They need to come from genZ, not from other age groups. Elders can prepare genZ to brave the challenges and travel miles to be humans and not slaves. 
Greetings. Dks
07/02/26, 4:36 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 979

Mr Bala Ajjampur
"Sir, with genZ being lured into metaverse and looking at everything as a game based learning, and, interactions sprouting without demographical boundaries,  the current education systems are becoming a burden for many students as they do not understand a simple conceot of learning the purpose of graphs without their applied use in the real world. We have one set of students who have excelled academically but lack digital literacy and skills to navigate a digital world that is exponentially getting intertwined with the real world. The other set is on top of this digital world intrusion, but  without any progress made on the academic side, they are not picked to be part of the workforce that would benefit from their skills. In the end, I have a feeling that the current education system will let genZ down, whichever set we are looking at. So elders have a tough time dealing with genZs whichever set they belong to. Are my fears justified?"
My response
My knowledge of gen Z in India gives me a lot of confidence. Most gen Z are serious and hard working. They do very well in 12th class exams. I have seen 15 year old building AI agents. Many high school students know both AI and quantum. They are also strong in math. Rural students are not using social networks and spend time on their studies. So I don't have any fears on this count. 
While most Indian students in engineering have reasonable knowledge of AI, they haven't got to an inventive mode. we are still followers. The government encourages AI research in a big way. But IITs are not very active. I am hopeful.
Let me continue with Karunakara's agony.
He is worried about our education and our schools. I am also concerned about education. 
But I am looking for alternate approaches not the Macaulay's model of clerks producing school education.
Education happens only to the extent of 10% in schools. Schools teach artificial aspects. Life and living teaches reality of how to live, how to decide, how to connect with people etc. So we get 90% education from listening to parents, neighbors and society, observing nature, people and their actions, getting involved with societal work, questioning whatever we encounter, and reading lots of books and seeing many useful learning videos. So let us strengthen these cognitive processes by creating a good and calm societal ambiance for it. 
I look back to my childhood. Life was calm, steady, unhurried and happy. Where did all these disappear now?
I feel that in the olden days, temples were built to create a great ambiance to calm our minds, focus them and contemplate. We had tanks, open spaces, river banks, parks which also gave us a great ambiance to listen and think and act. Even Sampige road in the sixties was a calm place. You can admire the trees, eat bun butter,jam and walk serenely.That was my activity then.But not today.
To me meditation is not vacuous sitting. It is deep contemplation. It is learning concentration. The vibrations of prayer also help us. Even temples are crowded now. People are in a hurry while visiting temples. We miss that serenity now.
When children are brought up in today's hurried atmosphere, what happens? They learn to worry and forget to be calm, to concentrate and contemplate,essential for education. We need to change this. How?
It is not easy, but necessary. We have to educate parents and teachers that a calm atmosphere induces in-depth learning. So build calm atmosphere in houses and schools. Make a room or a large area a silence zone first. See the impact. 
Then change your mindset. New ways of learning is the need now not just traditional schools. Most children have 20 to 30% extra learning capabilities. Use it and guide them to learn human behaviors and actions as well as AIs role in our activities.
Quantum mindset- randomness, digital, multiple solutions and uncertainties - is different and opposite to the school physics. I don't see opportunities for our school children to go quantum way. 
Lastly, remember there are a large number of intellectuals and dooms day prophets who say IT will die. Don't worry. GCCs are reworking strategies to operations of companies and most are in India.It will take a minimum of 5 years to embed AI in all existing software systems and that needs a million AI software architects. So, let us forget about the evils of AI and concentrate on mastering, applying and controlling AI.
Greetings. Dks
08/02/26, 4:48 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.   980
Who is a wise man   - He who learns of all men.    Talmud
"It is not how much you know about life but how you live your life that counts. Those who can avoid mistakes by observing the mistakes of others are most apt to keep free from sorrow. In a world full of uncertainties, the record of what has gone before—human experience —is as sure and reliable as anything of which we know. "
Ray Lyman Wilbur
Let me look at my fourth level interactions. My third level human relationships for the past 20 plus years were with students and academics, computer professionals and power professionals. Now there came a big change.
During my life ,I had met and interacted with thousands of students and several thousands of people in all walks of life. Next to books, these encounters made my knowledge very rich and broad, something no institution or university in the world teaches. I became wise to worldly knowledge and happenings. 
During my stay with the Karnataka government, I met different kinds of people. I interacted with ministers, IAS officers, politicians, government officers and staff. It opened my eyes to Karnataka- the state,its geography and its diversity, my concerns and people governing the state.
I won't discuss all my interactions, but with a few persons only.
The first one I met was Mr Jayakumar Anagol. I spent several hours every week with him. He was a philosophy graduate and had a lot of interest in education. He was the secretary to CM then. He used to read a lot of books. So we had a lot of intellectual conversation. I continued my discussions with him for decades even after returning to IISc.
We had a Friday weekly lunch meeting of secretaries and I met several IAS officers. I had intellectual interactions with many. A few names are Mr RA Naik, additional chief secretary, Mr MK Venkatesan, development commissioner, Mr AS Melkote, Secretary, forests, Mr Mohandas Moses, Home, Mr Vasudevan,Home, Mr BR Prabhakar, Industries and commerce, Mr Warrier, Finance, Mr Venkatesh,PWD and several others.
The next person was RP Krishnamurthy, our undersecretary, a pious and honest person. I was surprised to see such a simple and hard working person in a chaotic CMs office. He worked sincerely for long hours, and he wouldn't eat anything in the office. He didn't eat outside, a remarkable resolve. I liked his commitment to his job and his religious beliefs.I used his experience while filling the confidential reports of officers in our department. He normally deferred to my opinion.
The pollution control board was under me.So I met Mr Hanumantha Rao, chairman of the pollution control board and found him not active. He was looking for excuses. The secretary,Capt Raja Rao, was better. I attended several board meetings. I met them very frequently. I met other officers also. I felt that there was a recruitment problem in the board- all officers up to the  chairman came from the PWD. So they didn't know about pollution control. Air pollution was more difficult for them to understand. So the board was just managing. They couldn't handle most court cases.Most approvals were deemed approvals, not strict approvals.Many high polluting paper,sugar, chemical industries got deemed approval without installing control units. I started questioning the board's delays in approvals. I told them to remove the possibility of deemed approvals. All approvals should be after installing control units to treat the waste water. But he dodged that most of the time pleading for the industries. I found the secretary tougher and started instructing him mostly.
I had met Mr Veerappa Moily, the finance minister, several times. With his help, I took actions in the Belur temple. Moily was a sensitive person. He stopped many projects. He attended KSCST exe-com regularly. 
I met V Balasubramanian at Bhimarayanagudi , found him very efficient and he was intellectually inclined. 
I met several ministers and legislators during my period in the government. I found many politicians to be simple minded. Corruption was just growing up. But most senior IAS were not corrupt. 
Greetings. Dks
09/02/26, 5:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 981
The manner in which one single ray of light, one single precious hint, will clarify and energize the whole mental life of him who receives it, is among the most wonderful and heavenly of intellectual phenomena.
 Arnold Bennett
Another important person I met was Prof LT Sharma, who was the principal of the Mahatma Gandhi college in Sirsi and conducted the Bedthi conference. He was appointed as a speech writer to the chief minister. He met me frequently. I gave ideas for the speeches and even contributed. I converted the focus towards the environment and renewable energy. Once, the forest minister asked me who wrote the CMs speeches. He wanted me to write his speech once.
Let me narrate three instances I remember.
The first instance relates to a forest department conference. I wrote about the need for reducing firewood consumption and use of high efficient stoves- we were promoting solar cookers, biogas stoves and priagni stoves then-. I attended the conference. After reading out the written speech, the chief minister talked in the opposite direction saying 'it is all nice. But poor people suffer and can't buy firewood. So the forest department should arrange supply of firewood.' I was shocked. Later, when I was talking to forest officers, they didn't understand the statement and opposed it. Education of renewable energy and energy conservation was a tough and developing area then. I talked to students about environment, resources conservation and renewables where ever I went. But when I talked to students at Karnatak university to the students about it , I found that they didn't understand anything. 
The second instance was the speech by the chief minister at the KSCST annual general meeting. Prof Sharma met me and I gave him a lot to write for that speech by the CM. After a day, I was asked to prepare the CMs speech. So I wrote the speech. The CM read the speech with some difficulty. I had written in detail about the activities of the newly created S and T department, about popularization of renewable energy devices, about Priagni, about rural database creation- incidentally this became later in the nineties a big project of DST government of India called NRDMS and KSCST and I played a big role in this project-,and our problem generation methods. Mr Anagol liked the speech. Even Mr Moily appreciated that speech. I felt that AKN was upset with that speech. After the meeting, he asked me ,' did you write the speech', I said yes. He wasn't happy. 

The third instance was ISTE convention. Prof Mahadevan, principal, KREC, Surathkal met me a few days before the convention and said that this convention would be a trend setter. He said that the CM would announce the setting up of a separate technological university for karnataka. 
There were two opinions trending in the state. Some wanted autonomous colleges. Many wanted a technological university controlling all engineering colleges in Karnataka state. I thought that concept goes against the starting of many universities that was happening in the country. The CMs speech prepared by Prof Sharma had a lot of inputs from me. I had spoken opposing a single university.
After the convention was over, Prof Mahadevan met me. He was crestfallen that the CM didn't announce a tech university. Then I revealed the secret to him. 
I made significant contributions in many speeches of the CM. He even spoke about the heritage of India in several places. I found Mr Gundu Rao,our CM, a very bold and courageous person. The opposition - Mr Deve Gowda- was not very active then. Mr Ramakrishna Hegde was in Delhi.
Greetings. Dks
10/02/26, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 982
I met a large number of senior officers in many government departments. 
I traveled with the CM to Delhi a couple of times and saw the respect shown to him by several senior congress dignitaries, some waiting till 2 am as our evening flights were usually delayed by several hours. Flight delays were common in those days with only Indian airlines operating in the country. During these journeys, I met Mr Karthikeyan,DIG of police. He saw to it that none offers drinks to the CM. I also met Mr GV Rao , DG of police. I spent a lot of time with him. He was Prof CNR Rao's brother in law. I remember one trivial conversation with him about choosing a good day for an activity. After asking me, he immediately said,' you are a scientist and you don't believe in good time or rahukala etc.'I met Bharathi Vishnuvardhan also once. I met Mr Nijalingappa, and also Mr Varadan IAS ,his secretary when he was the CM.General Kariappa was made the Field Marshall at that time and he was talking to Mr Nijalingappa in familiar tones.
The administration of Gundu Rao was effective and orderly most of the time, almost till the end of his term as CM. We didn't have any dispute with our neighboring states.Cauvery problem was non existent. He had a good relationship with MGR. MGR invited him for the Bharathiyar function at Ettayapuram in south Tamilnadu.Our CM took a large number of people with him.He was impressed about the function. He was asking ,'Why can't we do functions in such a grand manner.' He also replied that kannadigas didn't like grand functions.
 But unfortunately, he didn't realize the emotions of people on language. So the Gokak report created a big turbulence across the state. It wanted primacy to Kannada and wanted every student to study Kannada compulsorily. Unfortunately, many students in Karnataka got exemption from Kannada language and took up other languages like Sanskrit, Urdu,Telugu, Tamil, even French etc.Even though the government accepted the report and agreed to implement it in stages, the agitators had a different agenda.
That was a tough time.We couldn't go by government cars. The state car of law secretary was burnt by miscreants. Still I traveled in the state. My driver, Vijakumar, was very efficient, had painted Kannada license plate even before the agitation and so he managed the agitators.Most educational institutions were affected. The Kendriya vidyalaya  of IISc was located near Yeshwantpur and locals there threatened the school.My children were studying there. It was a worrying time for parents.Even Dr Rajkumar was heckled and had to be taken into Vidhana Soudha for safety.
I went with Mr Shivarama karanth to a college in Siddapur. He said that the Kannada medium was not a good thing at that point of time, since there were no books on science and mathematics in Kannada. The students appreciated his comments. 
Because of this agitation, congress lost the elections. Mr Ramakrishna Hegde became the chief minister in 1982. Within a week, he brought the state under control by arresting thousands of Rowdi sheeters.
I should talk about two senior persons - Mr RA Naik, chief secretary and Mr PR Nayak, development commissioner. Both were knowledgeable about the state and were innovative. RA Naik started a week long file clearance drive. Lots of files were pending in many departments and so he initiated this move. Vidhana Soudha gates were locked and all departments should report on the number of files cleared. It was an effective activity,cleaning up the files accumulated in the departments. My both departments were almost current with one or two pending files. So I decided on my usual practice of spending morning hours at IISc and reaching Vidhana Soudha by 11am. The gates were closed, but I managed to get in fortunately.
We were traveling from Gulbarga to Hyderabad after a meeting at Gulbarga. He identified many things on the way and predicted many things. His knowledge of that area was amazing.
Let me continue in the next post
Greetings.dks
11/02/26, 5:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 983
"Character and intelligence. The poles your talent spins on, displaying your gifts. One without the other brings only half of success. It isn’t enough to be intelligent; you must also have the right character. The fool fails by behaving without regard to his condition, position, origin, or friendships."
Art of worldly wisdom.     Baltazar Gracian
Let me continue discussions on my interactions.
Another person who impressed me was Mr PR Nayak. He was the development commissioner of Karnataka,an important person in the state. 
Let me give a bit of history about this position of the development commissioner. It is a great innovation.
Mr.G V K Rao, a very well known administrator of Karnataka, a deep thinker and a reformer, wanted a government department without files, but with the main task of looking after the development of the state. He created this position in the late fifties. Instead of doing firefighting operations all the time, he felt that we should look at the growth of the state- "what activities are being done? How is the progress and what are the hurdles?What are their impacts and how to modify them? What needs to be done? How should the government go about the new activities?"
This brings me to another question- why is Bangalore growing fast in industries and science and technology? Many people- both Indians and foreigners ask me this question. I even gave a talk on this topic at Stanford university.
Mysore even in pre independence time had focused on development and education. Sir Seshadri Iyer as Diwan was responsible for laying strong foundations for todays status of Bangalore. He helped in setting up the Tata silk farm in 1896 in Bangalore. He was also responsible for the shivasamudra hydro power plant set up in 1903 supplying motive power to KGF and power for lighting to Bangalore- the first in Asia. His third act was the quick response and assistance to Tata to set up IISc in 1909. At that time, India, as a whole, had some ideas of surveying and civil engineering  but no idea about electrical engineering. These acts gave a great direction and primacy for Bangalore. From that time, the Diwan's focused on the development of the state. Sir MV constructed the KRS dam and set up the steel plant in 1937. Then came HAL and BEL and ITI which made Bangalore a tech city by 1950s.
 So GVK Rao's setting up the development commissioner post is not a surprise.I had met him in the early seventies for discussions on pricing the cost of electrical energy from Sharavathy Valley hydel project to Karnataka. I also met him when he was the chief secretary in 1975 -76 period, during the initial operational period of KSCST. 
By the 70s, Bangalore was moving from electronics to computers.
 The first reason for the industry culture is historical support. The second reason was the curious and cooperative nature of the local people.
But the most important aspect is the development of scientific culture of the people and city. We saw several electrical, chemical and electronics industries coming up at periodic intervals in Bangalore building an early entrepreneurial culture. This was complemented with development of many R and D labs in Bangalore- there were more than 60 by 1980.
I had discussions with PR Nayak several times on renewable energy, tree plantations and soil enrichment. We traveled to Bijapur to attend a two days workshop for the DRDO chiefs and district agriculture officers of all districts. He evinced keen interest in the project, asked many questions, did quick calculations on cost, revenue etc. and gave some suggestions. His participation was useful.
Greetings. Dks
12/02/26, 4:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 984
"For years now I have sought enlightenment,” he said. “I feel I am very close now, but I want to know what my next step should be.”“How do you earn your living?” asked the master.“I’ve never yet had to earn my living, because my mother and father have always supported me, but that’s a mere detail.”“Your next step is to look at the sun for half a minute,” said the master.The disciple obeyed.When he had done as he was told, he was asked by the master to describe the countryside around him.“I can’t see a thing, because the sun blinded me,” said the disciple.“A man who seeks only the light and hands all his responsibilities to others will never find enlightenment. A man who keeps his eyes fixed only on the sun will end up blind,” said the master."
Maktub    Paulo Coelho 
I met many more officers and CEOs.  I got quite a lot of knowledge about the mindset of people - mild, duty conscious, knowledgeable, -, and the IAS- highly motivated, deep thinking, knowing a lot about the state, reading a lot, highly focused about the local problems in firefighting mode and working for personal growth and success-, and the culture of the state- mostly drought prone, agriculture based, mostly mild, active, maintaining their traditions , holding on to values etc. Actually, I don't want to typecast. But a sizable number of people follow that pattern. 
But the state is diverse. So the attitudes of people vary. Bangalore is at one end. North karnataka- Bijapur, Gulbarga- at the other end.
Somewhere I read -was it CS Lewis? -that when we read fiction, it enlarges our reality. We get new and expanded reality.That was true for me as a child. I gained a lot of knowledge about the different societies in India, different places ,cities and villages, different people and their behaviors, independence movement, middle class lives etc. It was a great journey starting with kalki- alaiosai,thyagabhoomi, ponniyin selvan etc- and going through hundreds of authors, I learnt a kaleidoscopic picture of India first and later about the west through Wodehouse, Arthur Canon Doyle, etc.
As I said before, the correct and current information that I got was from listening to discussions by people. I learnt about life,living, habits, values,motivation,positiveness,courage from family.I got a lot of knowledge about politics, about neighboring towns, about the behaviors of people,about temples and functions. Through observation ,I learnt about agriculture operations,money, banking,purchases, organized activities etc. So my world knowledge came through all these sources and little from the school.
But now I got a much deeper, much wider and correct exposure to Karnataka, its people and culture through my extensive visits, discussions and interactions with hundreds of people and readings. 
But there is a big difference in gathering knowledge from reading a book and from visits and discussions. Here I learn by observing, by focused questioning - what, why and how, difficulties- and getting clarifications,by analyzing the data and responses from several sources. The effects of such learning are
1. We know the context in detail. This means that we have a better, detailed picture of the topic or problem we are looking at. Book information is static, and may not be clear. Text books are cryptic. Manuals are not readable in many cases.
2. The learning is dynamic. We ask questions and get in-depth understanding. We can get more details,we can clarify our doubts. So we build a good picture. Analysis will be meaningful.
3. There are several sources and we can get reasonably accurate data and explanations.
Let me give one example. We started the tree cultivation program in a big way. We promoted one species - subabul-, as it was fast growing and provided leaf manure. Our discussions revealed that our tree planting worked in some places and not in others. Discussions on operations with many foresters didn't reveal any problem. But we found Bijapur district successfully implemented the scheme and lakhs of plants were growing fast without failures.
So we went and after hours of discussions and several field visits found out a simple fact that the farmers pre treated the seeds with Rhizome before planting and that was responsible for the success. So we conducted a two-day workshop for all districts in charge. We moved from foresters to agricultural officers. Our learning came from experiments ,expertise and discussions.
From 1980 onwards, Karnataka occupied a prominent place in my activities. I started my involvement with the problems of Karnataka with KEB in early seventies, and with ASTRA and KSCST in mid seventies  and now it moved to a higher level.
Greetings. Dks
13/02/26, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 985
Mr Debashis has two comments. The first one:
"This part gives a clear picture of how computerisation progressed and involvement of  computer based infrastructure. It addresses the journey of computer systems that our respected Mr. Kohli once wrote down. I have an old writing pad of Mr. Kohli where he scribbled his thoughts on transformative path of computer infrastructure over twenty years or so. Thank you , Sir for your wisdom full texts. We need to organise these all text in a collective form which not only covers technology but it captures facts on society , life , environment , healthcare etc across the globe. "
My response
This comment looks at my mindset. While I did specialise many times over- first electrical engineering, then power, then computers and after that energy, I realised the main concept in Shikshavalli section of  taitreya upanishad early in my life. I was introduced to Shikshavalli recitation as a child even before I knew the word science. I knew mathematics. But I understood organization, sociology, ethics, human behavior much better than science. 
The Shikshavalli talks about connections between parts at three to four levels. It talks about connecting the connections or a central control. I didn't comprehend it at that age.But, when you see the connections of abstract concepts repeated with several examples, it forms an impression in your mind and that creates a major impact. So when I saw the first example - family connections, village connections. That brought a question - why do people have a bond with each other? This is easy to answer- safety, security, survival,mutual help, cooperation etc. The second question is deeper- how do they bond, how a society remains stable for a long time amidst warfare, destructions, natural calamities, migrations, petty minds, etc?
I was really curious and searching for answers. I looked at the second question throughout my life and found many nuances to answers.
Science concentrates on parts and doesn't look at connections. Flows are important.Ecology looked at water cycle, carbon cycle etc trying to knit different groups to produce a dynamic understanding. Roger Penrose has removed the mystery. There are no particles. Look at everything as fields. Fields are continuous. So light ,electricity, magnetism are fields. So it proves that quantum fields show the existence of through connections.
The area IT is a connective network. It needed architecture. But IT is related to business. FC Kohli understood it. Like me, he was also concerned about rural problems. He wanted to do something about agriculture. He asked me about it even in the year-2006 or 7. I found economy is linked with many aspects- manufacturing, food production, energy, ecology etc. To get a holistic picture, one has to look at the connections. Hence my posts.
My grandson,Neel, is a polyglot. He started with animals, moved to insects and to ecology and to history. His interests are deeply into many disciplines. He is passionate about animals that he turned into a vegan.
Debashis second comment:
"Outstanding!! I wonder how can still remember names of so many people you have interacted with."
My response
I was worried, when I started writing my biography at the request of my grandson,Vishak, whether I have enough to sustain writing about the several thousand incidents that happened to me professionally and socially and the changes happening in technology, society, politics and lifestyles.Initially, I was blank.I destroyed my diaries and all my papers. I didn't remember many things. But as I started writing, my memory opened up. This may be true for all of us. Focus, concentration, contemplation and constant thinking helped me in remembering the events and people.Many incidents reappeared in my memory and then came to the posts.
Greetings. Dks
14/02/26, 4:13 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 986
"I take Naval seriously because he
:Questions nearly everything
 •  Can think from first principles
 •  Tests things well 
•  Is good at not fooling himself
 •  Changes his mind regularly
 •  Laughs a lot 
•  Thinks holistically
 •  Thinks long-term 
•  And…doesn’t take himself too goddamn seriously."
Tim Ferriss.   The Almanack of naval ravikant
More comments:
Nagaraja ,ex Kirloskar
Good morning sir. We, who are living in this century are a witness to two great realities/challenges: one,Natural Stupidity  & the other is  Artificial Intelligence.I don't know whether my observation is correct and needs serious attention for the well-being of this world. Pl throw some light when you wish to change from your present line of thoughts . Thanks with regards. Greetings: HSN
My response
I want to contradict your assumption on natural stupidity. 
First, who are we,Indians?
This question can be answered by looking at the post independence period- that is also my period of observations and analysis.
There is no single typecast. I will classify not people but characteristics of the core group of people. We have two core groups- doers and policy makers or government people. Let me look at the core group - doers. The country is running because of them. This group has many sub groups:
Mechanical workers
Thinkers and teachers
Leaders- strategists and system designers and builders.
Our country depends on the leaders. 
Our leaders have the following characteristics to varying degrees. 
1.Studious, observant, deep learning
2.Questioning and curiosity,
3. Logical reasoning, mathematical precision and analysis
4.Flexibility, resilience and adaptability to change
5. Culture- social, religious,
6.Value system- family, truth, honesty, helping tendency,
The country runs because of these qualities present to a sufficient depth in a reasonable- critical size- number of people. These qualities allow the people in the group to work in different dimensions What is interesting is that this group size is not constant, but steadily increased over the years.
It is a steady improvement of our people that helps in our development, growth and stability. Let us then ask-how Indians improved over this period?
There has been multidimensional approaches by many agencies that allowed us to improve.
Government focused on providing education to most people at affordable rates. NGOs helped children to get nutritious food.
People realized that they should change their living practices and provided good education to their children. This change is a game changer for India. Today we produce the largest number of engineers every year in the world. 
People started another change- religious change. You can't go to a major temple today for peace. You find lakhs going to temple,lakhs following Samskara and sadachara and lakhs aspiring to do more, to help others and to come up in life. 
That transformation over several decades of people in many villages and cities was called sanskritization by Prof MN Srinivas. I call it brahminization. We accept scholarship, learning, meditation, yoga, prayer etc as important and desirable characteristics of our life.
So people are moving up the learning and leadership ladder. They will educate others and try to reduce the stupidity of going totally towards a materialistic way.
But this transformation reduced the pride of artisan's skills. Actually, jnana and artisan skills are like mathematics and physics. Both have to be balanced. They are not, and that is our problem. May be we will have robotic artisans.
Similarly, our resilience will help us go through the AI wave.
Greetings. Dks
15/02/26, 4:34 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 987
Let me return to my life paths. I had bought a site in West of chord road second stage, about two to three kilometers distant from my residence in Malleswaram.Mr Thimme Gowda, who was living close to me in Subramanya Nagar and working at the electrical inspectorate, told me to construct a house on my site. He had a mason who was good and reliable. He said that he would help me in the construction. I thought about it and said ok to take up the house construction without a contractor. At that time, I didn't know the problems that I would be facing in getting materials like cement, steel, bricks etc and problems with workers and theft. It was a foolhardy activity. But I agreed. 
There were two immediate requirements to start the work. The first was the preparation of a building plan and getting it approved by BDA. I defined our feasible requirements first- two bed room, a separate drawing room and dining room, kitchen etc.I decided on a single storey construction with staircase and a room upstairs. I decided on a big garage, a sump for water storage.After several trials, I made a draft plan. 
I was helped by PSTI in preparing the plan. Mr Magudapathy took care of the plan preparation.The draftsman there was very helpful. Then I prepared a detailed estimate,again a major exercise. I submitted these to BDA. Fortunately the Engineer in charge was related to Thimme Gowda and I got approval fast. 
The next step was more tedius- getting a loan for the construction. I had very little money. Fortunately,HDFC opened a branch in Bangalore at that time. I applied for a loan giving the documents. I had to go several times to the office. The manager was harassing me. I discussed it with Mr GV Anantharamiah,director,PSTI. I was lucky. He knew the chief of the HDFC branch.They played badminton together.So he talked to the chief and I got the loan sanctioned.Even private companies need recommendation to do routine things. The interest rate was very high, about 15%. I had to pay about rupees thousand as EMI, my salary being a little more than 2000 rupees per month.DSA was still low at that time. So life was tight financially.So I needed a tight fiscal control in construction. That was impossible as costs were escalating every day.
Now, I had to get the materials ready. I listed the activities and sequences. We employed the mason, whom Mr Gowda knew. We leveled the ground making it ready for house construction.
The state government had a bricks factory in Hoskote, near Bangalore. I talked to Mr Ashwatnarayana, chief engineer, PWD. He talked to the factory. I made the payment, arranged a truck to transport bricks to my site. We could get sand from Yeshwantpur and it was easy. Mr Ashwatnarayana became a friend for more than two decades and I had a lot of interactions with him when he was the MD of KPC.
Now another major problem - cement - arose.It was scarce and the market price was high. The government in those days gave us permits for buying cement at a controlled price, if one deposited dollars. My cousin Jayanthi's husband, Subramanian, was  an officer in the UCO bank. I kept about 1000 dollars that I got as reimbursement of my travel to Boston in 1978.So I opened an account in his branch and deposited the dollars. I applied for control cement and got a truck load of cement. It was not an easy decision. Mr Gowda preferred Sankar cement, but we got Birla cement from Ammapet.
Since many mini steel plants came up in Karnataka and even in Bangalore, steel was available in the market and I could buy them directly. I needed a structural design for the first floor roof. I approached Dr Venkatram Reddy, a faculty at IISc and a student of Prof KS Jagadish. He did the design.
Now we needed wooden structures for doors, windows, wardrobes etc. Again Mr Gowda came to my rescue. He knew Major Somasekhar, who was the GM of a wood working workshop. We discussed with Major and finalized the teak wood component. It was very expensive- almost 25% of the total cost. Still the quality was good ,manufactured in a factory. So I agreed. Major Somasekhar lived close to my site, just a few houses away. He started taking interest in the construction as he was a civil engineer. He again became a great friend and that continued for decades. He did all my furniture work afterwards.
So I kickstarted my house construction, now supported by many. Mr Anagol asked me whether I would use mud blocks instead of bricks. I said no. I had discussed it and found it difficult to implement. I didn't have the time to execute it. Instead  I decided to build the compound wall in mud.
My daily routine changed. I started the day by 8am , visited the site with Mr Gowda, then go yo IISc and later to Vidhana Soudha. In between ,I had to go to HDFC, banks, purchases, etc- a tough set of tasks.
The construction took more than a year.Let me continue to discuss it in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
15/02/26, 5:55 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy maha shivarathri to all. Let there be peace and quietness, happiness and health everywhere. 
Greetings
Dks
16/02/26, 4:21 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 988
I visited the site almost every day. I would get ready by 8am, and went to Mr Gowda's house. Then I went to IISc. Initially I went by car, but later it was by auto. He went to his office. This routine was going on satisfactorily and the progress was steady. Quite a number of days, Major joined us and gave a lot of suggestions. I remember two suggestions. He said that alignment of the door frame area in a wall was poor. I saw it quickly. The second was a major change. He quickly redesigned the roof steel structure. That showed the difference between theory and experience. 
We decided on a white mosaic floor for the entire house except the kitchen and bath rooms.That appealed to me when I saw it in the Parijatha tiles factory in Dr Rajkumar road. That added to the cost of construction.
We ordered a granite single platform for the kitchen with a grinding stone and a washbasin carved in it.The walls in kitchen and bath rooms had glazed tiles. 
I found there were many hurdles and difficulties in house construction then in 1981-82. It is more so now. The major problems are:
1.Supply chain management in an unorganized sector. There was a lot of uncertainty leading to delays.
2.Manpower management and coordination in the last stage between the electrical contractor, the plumber, the painter, mosaic floor polishing,
I gave the electrical contract to my friend, Mahantesh from CPRI.
3.The third was cost control. This is a dangerous domain. My estimate was a little more than the loan amount. At the same time, I didn't want the quality to come down, long term durability maintained and aesthetics taken care of. So we went for teak, granite kitchen platform, high cost paints etc. I was fortunate to have maintained the cost nearer the estimate. I had no extra funds available. So it was not a simple task towards the end. It was chaos.
I had a lot of support from many. My new friend, Sankarasubramanian, also visited the site a couple of times, and gave me some steel panels for the railings on the first floor saying that I shouldn't buy them at that time.
I had difficulties in getting connections for water and power. Dr Satyanarayana, who worked with me on the water project and knew the engineers in BWSSB, helped in getting both water and sanitary connections. There was a considerable delay in getting the electricity connection. I talked Mr Rudrappa, Chief Engineer,KEB. He immediately ordered the concerned division in charge to give connection. The mechanic, who came to make the connection, was grumbling. He was unhappy. While most connections were DC- direct connections without meters as there was a shortage of energy meter-, I got a metered connection.
By the beginning of 1983, the house was completed. I organized a house warming ceremony in march 83. 
My cousin D R Sundaram had moved recently in 1982, attended the ceremony. My father attended the function and left by 12 noon. Most of my colleagues from the department came for lunch. GK admired the construction and appreciated the house.
So that episode was over and it taught me a new way of handling uncertainties and urban reality. 
Greetings. Dks
17/02/26, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 989
Let me return to my government job.During this period, the government decided to give a parcel of land in the new BEL road side to ISRO to set up a head quarters. I attended the meeting. I met Mr A Bharat, BDA commissioner for the first time in that meeting. He said that he knew about me. It seems his son attended a public lecture on computers given by me in Institute of World culture,BP Wadia road and was inspired by it to go for computer science specialization.
There was some land left out in that area- close to Sanjay Nagar. I talked to Prof Ramaseshan and Mr Veerappa Moily after a KSCST exe-com meeting about the land availability and the institute to ask for it. That land was given to IISc and today we have our faculty quarters there and it is called vigyan nagar. I was happy that I could do this for my Institute.
All these days ,I talked about understanding the world as a major purpose in our life. We call this understanding generated by each of us a reality. A reality world is built based on our learnings, our perceptions, beliefs and dogmas. This leads me to two questions:
What is one's world? I don't use the world as a normally accepted term. The world I mean here refers to one's reality. This world is the knowledge one acquires throughout his life in multiple areas, disciplines and dimensions. The first clarity is that this reality is not absolute, it is relative, dynamic and transient and may contain errors and wrong interpretations- rope perceived as a snake.
The second question is more complex. How does one comprehend the world of reality? Schopenhauer feels that we can conceive a world as ideas or as will.  You don't use the constructs of science, but that of philosophy. Because, we need tools to understand. Language, philosophy and science give us tools to help us to classify and group every idea into a box. For instance, science talks of matter and waves. Human science talks of body and mind and Hinduism goes into more groupings called panchakosa or thattvas. These constructs and mechanisms help us to store, retrieve, comprehend and apply what we learnt.
Even with the same person, reality changes depending on moods. A person is a communist one day and a rightist the next day; a person is a secular person one day, atheist another day and a religious person next day; a person is a Gandhian one day, becomes a fan of technology and so on. You see the transient nature of our individual reality.
Each one has some level - breadth and depth- and some understanding of a reality. If you sum up all these realities, you get a reasonably large universe. That is what GPT is doing now. It collects its reality from millions of sites to answer a question. Let me see how the reality manifests in decision making with an example.
We come to the end of 1982. I had spent nearly a year in the government. I was sitting in the vidhana soudha office on Oct 27th,1982 and started contemplating about the government job. 
My taking up the government job had many mixed reviews. Some felt that I had a good job. Even Ramaseshan felt that the job had potential to grow. Some others like Prof MS Naidu of HV department felt that I was not doing the correct thing. Some felt that I was wasting my time.
Keeping all these in mind, I got an urge to decide on this day - what would be the next step. I had completed a year in the government.My heart has always been in academics. I felt that I had reached a saturation level in the government job. I am impatient and wants things to happen, expect fast response from students ,don't want to wait in queues, or in the health centre and want to get things completed quickly and forget about it- BL Deekshatulu used to say - get rid of it. I am very unhappy if things hang on for a long time. Despite my best tries, I couldn't change this characteristic of mine even though I tell myself - why the hurry? Wait and have patience. What will I do after this activity? Sit at home and relax. Think of relaxation here. It doesn't work. I read or write even when I wait for something or travel by bus. Still, the impatience persists in me. I found that there seemed a lot of difference between my speed and the government's speed. IISc was my place of happiness. So I informed Mr Anagol that I would like to return back to IISc. So I returned on Oct 28,1982 back to IISc.
While I returned to IISc, I didn't delink myself from activities of the state government. I was associated with various activities of the government till my retirement from IISc in 2004.
Greetings. Dks
18/02/26, 3:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 990
Watch your thoughts, they become words; Watch your words, they become actions; Watch your actions, they become habits; Watch your habits, they become your character;
Watch your character, it becomes your destiny.
Anonymous quote
Prof Karunakara:
"Sir,We thank God for making you come back to academics. Otherwise, we could have missed an excellent academician who influenced thousands of peoples in their walk directly or indirectly and cherished in their life. Thanks and regards"
Thanks.
Let me give my reflections of this one year's activities with the state government. The reason is to address a doubt- was it a waste? Was it a crime for an academic to waste his years with such non academic activities?
First, I learnt a lot. I got adjusted to my job very fast from day one. I devised my own processes for both departments. I read a number of books on the environment and saw many real life experiments. The most important learning I had is:
People, including politicians, officers and employees, are good and helpful.
I remember two statements by Mr Anagol:
"Better should not stand in the way of good. "
I may not fully endorse this statement as I feel that it leads to mediocrity and not excellence.He was looking at mediocrity- government- and I excellence- academics - two differing poles. My belief is that if you aim for a higher goal, you may reach a middle to high level. If you aim for a high goal, you may end up at a low level,and feel satisfied and happy. But it gives us another dimension that you shouldn't aim for perfection. In the game for perfection, you don't do anything.
Secondly,people think that a higher goal is not achievable and keep quiet without doing anything. I have seen a large number of people with this attitude.
When I joined the Institute, the research culture was just building up in the engineering departments. So there were two groups- one keen on research, another of older people who felt that they were beyond the age for research.It is a belief. Later in the eighties,I saw several such non PhDs working seriously on research problems to get a PhD and many got PhD.
There was a faculty who said that we shouldn't do research in engineering as we don't have the necessary facilities, we are not Einsteins and we won't do great discoveries that will change our life. So he concentrated on teaching. Even in teaching he had ideas of some level of perfection and failed all students in a class leading to a fight with the head. He left IISc and joined IIT Bombay as a lecturer and continued as a lecturer. His concept may be ok for him personally, but it will not help in the education of students. 
But let me quote another person, who wasn't a great researcher. Prof BNN Iyengar used to say that research is not to come up with great and new discoveries like Newton. Research creates an in depth understanding of an area and awareness of current happenings in that area and this will help in making you a better teacher. Teaching and research are interlinked. I liked this concept.
That was the reason Prof Dhawan came up with the faculty contracts and promotions scheme. It spurred research work at IISc. Most old timers were sidelined.
The second comment by Mr Anagol relates to people. He was a great optimist. We used to discuss the capabilities and actions of different people and how they will handle their jobs. He was good at this. I recall one instance. There was a big delay in executing the cauvery water supply scheme for Bangalore city as the scheduled completion was nearing and most works were pending. He brought in Mr Gulam Mohammed as the chief engineer and he completed the project with good speed and efficiency.
At that time, there was a feeling that Congress would loose the coming elections, and Janata dal might win. He said whoever comes will have a self-interest for survival and so will do better. We needn't worry.As we now know that Ramakrishna Hegde came in as the next CM and the rule was very good with lots of new and fresh ideas and initiatives. But Anagol told him to appoint a person of his choice as secretary to CM. He withdrew from that job. He never underestimated people. I liked this character of him.
This stay in government changed my purpose. Earlier, It was to impart knowledge and wisdom to students and engineers. Now it got enlarged to help society by applying my knowledge to solve their problems- a big focus now on social problem solving and not just technology alone.
Greetings. Dks
19/02/26, 4:52 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 991
Two comments on the anonymous quote yesterday:
Nagaraja
"Regarding anonymous quote on WATCH:I remember Prof. G P Rajarathnam who used to say about WATCH on radio in the morning hours." Watch your Words,  Actions, Thoughts,Character,Heart."Thanks for making me to recall the good old days of Radio programmes.Greetings:HSN"
Uday Singh
"The quote is by Margret Thatcher the ex PM of UK."
Thanks for the clarity.

As soon as I returned back to IISc, my plate of work started filling up fast. On the personal side, two major tasks were going on. My house construction work is continuing and might take a year to complete.
I decided that my children should learn to swim. So I took them at 7 am every day to the swimming pool at IISc. We normally walked to the pool and while returning, we sometimes got an auto to reach home. My children will be hungry. This training went on for more than a month. So we spent their summer mornings learning to swim. Then at 830 am, I went to Mr Thimme Gowda's house and then to the site.
At the department level, I saw a big need from me. I had already structured and started a ME CSE program and a BE CSE program in the department. We separated control systems discipline into a separate ME program- called system science and automation- to be run jointly with the EE department. Computer science activity was peaking in IITs in India.
I started teaching two courses in each term. I started new courses on data structures and operating systems in one term and databases in another term.My course registration was one of the highest, next to the Math courses. I got students from SA,EE and ECE departments. My research activity also increased. So my focus in the department was on computer science areas. I was also taking care of the hybrid computer facility. I decided to modernize it.
ASTRA activities shifted to a different mode. Most faculty from other departments reduced their activities in ASTRA. I moved out of ASTRA and AKN also moved away from ASTRA. Prof KS Jagadish was still busy with ASTRA and became its convener. The one major project of interest was the development of ASTRA ole by prof Kumar and Lokras. It was a big achievement. They could demonstrate the high efficiency stove for cooking. It was taken over by KSCST for propagation with a total commitment from the state government.
I became involved with Madhav and signed a proposal to the Ministry of Environment to set up the centre for ecological sciences. I also got involved with various activities of CES and started visiting Sirsi to set up the field station and to recruit staff.
Prof S Ramaseshan wasn't happy with the operation of the computer centre. So he set up a fact finding committee with three members- Prof Vijayan, Dr KS Prabhu from ISRO and myself. Dr Prabhu excused himself. So Vijayan and I sat together, went through the situation and prepared a report suggesting reorganizing the centre. So Prof Ramaseshan set up an executive committee with powers to run the centre. Prof ES Rajagopal was made the chair and I became a prominent member. Prof ESR consulted me on all decisions. We became close. Dr. A A Shamim, earlier head of the centre, was upset. I visited TIFR along with R Krishnamurthy- we had faith only in his capabilities and discounted others as per the instructions of the director. We had lengthy discussions with Mr Sadanandan on improvements on operations.I put two students to simplify computer accounting and that reduced connect time to zero and computer time to less than an hour for completing accounts for a month. We automated slot booking and did more changes in operations.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
20/02/26, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 992
KSCST was transforming. It initially focused on looking at the problems faced in the state and created working groups to solve the problems. This concept of a working group was a great idea. I was part of the karnataka electricity working group started in 1975 or 76. A working group consisted of investigators,government officers and supporting people like economists, statisticians etc. It permitted collaborative work, improved understanding between members, facilitated data collection and helped in interpretation. There was great synergy. This concept of working group got reduced over a period of time.
 Then came the focus on the project work of engineering college students and KSCST came up with an SPP- students project program. It is continuing even now.It has become the flagship program now.
In order to help in analysing the problems and supporting the working group, we introduced systems analysts. The initial two- Mr NV Krishna and Mr Amarnath Bhat - were good perceptive, interested and enthusiastic persons and they worked tirelessly. But that was also short lived. The later crop were rule based people. I still remember the statement of Mr Guha - "KSCST is losing its scientific strength. It is becoming bureaucratic, and one day Mr Panduranga, admin in charge, will be the most important person in KSCST." I selected many and interacted with them. Most became dissatisfied and the post vanished.
I see that KSCST and DST as well as CSIR all move towards bureaucratic rule based governance and ignore science and technology. The biggest reason is the loss of associations with younger minds. All such organizations should have a few core staff and others should be interns or students.
Even solar, wind and bio gas projects got reduced over a period of time.Fortunately,KSCST had a great luck when Prof Kumar and Lokras designed, built ,experimented and produced a working model of a stove. The propagation became a big job and it was funded by the government and executed by KSCST.
Let me talk about another major project that came up in 1982 and I was involved in it. That is studies on various services in Bangalore.
Let me look at the scene in Bangalore in early 1982. The city was expanding in all directions and population was growing at the highest rate. But supply systems and infrastructure were not moving at a similar pace. Our bus system was notorious for non availability and great inefficiency. Electricity supply was leading to regular power cuts.Most commodities came from outside. Even milk supply was erratic. The education system- schools designed for the sixties- couldn't meet the needs of the city. So KSCST decided to take up the supply issues of various items to the city. Prof AKN and Vinod became the conveners. This marked the departure of AKN from rural focused problems to urban problems. I felt this was a very important and urgent project. I didn't get the sectors of my expertise- energy, industries, but got water. So I started another of my socially relevant engineering studies. It was exciting for me. I spent the next three plus years on the Bangalore water supply systems project. I had project assistants helping in collecting data.This was a very satisfying project for me. I will explain it later in details.
Greetings. Dks
20/02/26, 10:53 am - Sanjay Chitnis: The WATCH quote seems to have a basis from: "You are what your deep, driving desire is. As your desire is, so is your will. As your will is, so is your deed. As your deed is, so is your destiny." 
– Brihadaranyaka Upanishad IV. 4.5
20/02/26, 10:54 am - Sanjay Chitnis: kāmamaya evāyaṁ puruṣaḥ. sa yathākāmo bhavati tat kratur bhavati, yat kratur bhavati tat karma kuruṣe, yat karma kuruṣe tad abhi saṁpadyate.�
21/02/26, 4:10 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 993
One more clarification on the quote by Dr Sanjay Chitnis:
The WATCH quote seems to have a basis from: "You are what your deep, driving desire is. As your desire is, so is your will. As your will is, so is your deed. As your deed is, so is your destiny." – Brihadaranyaka Upanishad IV. 4.5
Mr Sethu Rao was the conscience keeper of KSCST, a person who believed in doing research and development to help the downtrodden, poor and remote areas of the state. He also had a great love for the Kannada language. He wanted to popularise both Kannada and science to children.
So he started a society called Karnataka Rajya Vijnana Parishad. It ran a magazine called Balavijnana. My association with Sethu Rao was quite deep. He lived close by and I met him almost every day. He was a very stable, mature and sober person. I got a lot of enrichment about kannada literature through him. I met many famous writers. I participated in the annual KRVP meetings and delivered talks in Kannada.I also visited several places in the state to inaugurate KRVP shakas and deliver lectures.One project I funded from the state government was on Banamathi- study and education to remove the fear of the people. We got books printed and distributed them to all schools and libraries in the Gulbarga division.
Language creates passions and fights. But I accepted language as a medium of communications. Actually my love for Kannada started from 1965 onwards. I always loved learning a new language from childhood. I learnt Tamil and Sanskrit as a child and then picked up English and Hindi in school. During the school days,I had a neighbor who was a kannidiga and I picked a few words from him. A teacher was also a kannadiga. 
My father had some knowledge of Telugu. I picked up a few words of Telugu during my college days.
When I joined the institute in 1965, my class was a highly mixed one almost one per state. So we had vigorous discussions on languages during the break times. I started learning Kannada from my class mates- particularly Srinivasan- and hostel staff. Mess was populated with Malayali staff. Mr GP Rajarathnam gave a talk in kannada in 1965. That motivated me. 
My close associations with Prof AR Vasudeva murthy, Dr Mahishi  and others spurred my interest in kannada. I started learning Kannada alphabets in 1971. I knew the children of many Kannada poets like Puthina, kuvempu, DVG, Gorur,etc. I interacted with Shivarama karanth,Da ra Bendre, Ha Ma Nayak.
More in the next
Greetings
Dks
21/02/26, 8:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Read “Discovery of problems, and products through a systems architecture approach
Prof D K Subramanian …“ by d k Subramanian on Medium: https://medium.com/@dksubra/discovery-of-problems-and-products-through-a-systems-architecture-approach-prof-d-k-subramanian-131c912011e0
21/02/26, 8:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: https://medium.com/@dksubra/discovery-of-problems-and-products-through-a-systems-architecture-approach-prof-d-k-subramanian-131c912011e0
21/02/26, 9:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Do you think we can have a talk cum discussion on this in Reva?
22/02/26, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  994
Let me look at my involvement with schools. It was a long time involvement and interest in helping schools.
That brings me to another activity we initiated in the Institute. Quite a good number of faculty in IISc were involved in improving school education. Some used to help in the development of text books. A group was training school teachers on science and mathematics topics. I and Prof MR Chidambara were involved in the high school teachers training program. Prof SV Subrahmanyam was very passionate about schools and teaching. So we decided to visit schools in various parts of Karnataka and give talks in Kannada in schools to students of 8th to 12th classes. It was called UGC extension lecture program. I was involved in this, visited schools in several places and gave talks on energy and computers. This activity continued till 2000. 
The directors, Prof Dhawan, Ramaseshan and later Prof CNR Rao supported this program. Its secretariat was located in the centre for continuing education.We produced a booklet every year containing a list of lectures and sent it to all schools and later colleges in the state.Actually after SVS, I became the convener of this program from early 1990 onwards. It was a very satisfying work for me,gave me a better picture of the state of schools in villages. I saw the excitement of children and their ignorance. 
Let me look at a few instances. I prepared a lot of slides to talk about computers. We bought a portable slide projector and carried it to schools. We had to travel to most places by bus. 
Let me give a few incidents. 
I visited Sirsi to give a talk on computers. I fell sick and was vomiting. Madhav was there and he was wondering whether I could manage to talk. We went to the college. My vomiting stopped when I started talking. My jokes were liked by Madhav. After the talk, I was fine.
I went to a high school in Nittur. The facilities were poor.  They had only small class rooms. We tried to talk to a nearby cinema theatre, but they refused to give the hall to us.The head master wanted me to talk to all classes. So I gave the talk four times. The children had no knowledge of even common English words like decimal or number. So I struggled to translate. But the pictures in the slides helped a lot.
Prof KI Vasu went as director CECRI, Karaikudi and called me to give a series of lectures to his officers. Similarly, Prof A Prabhakar went as Principal to MIT Manipal. He called me under this scheme to give a lecture to his students. Later I taught a few computer courses to their newly introduced computer science MTech students. But I had visited MIT several times before.
I visited several parts of Karnataka under this program.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
22/02/26, 6:01 am - Sanjay Chitnis: Sure Sir. It is an interesting topic. Let me check a suitable time for this.
23/02/26, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 995
My travels increased mostly to small towns in Karnataka. I had contacts with the NSS coordinators of universities and schools. So I was invited for lectures on environment in many NSN camps. I had a good friendship with Capt Umapathy, Mr Bhide, Mr Dilshad, Mr Narasimhiah, Mr Somasekhara and others. I visited several places in Karnataka and addressed NSS camps. I went to a camp at KD Gudi, a forest area without electricity in the BR hills, a great experience.I even visited camps in villages in Bangalore and Bijapur districts. All travels had to be performed by buses of KSRTC as the train connectivity was poor.I took my children to adichunchunagiri for a camp. 
I started advising Mr Sankarasubramanian in propagating his priagni stove across Karnataka. He organized a camp at Kemmannagundi and I took my children to the camp. They got good exposure to forest areas.
I got involved with Madhav in CES. I did a day's trekking in western ghats. I visited Sirsi, Kumta and nearby places. Some places didn't have toilet facilities.We recruited several persons for our research station and for CES at Bangalore.
My involvement with KSCST also increased. I should talk about my experience with Mr Jayadev. He was given charge of the SPP by KSCST. He literally harassed me ,with good intentions no doubt, with all matters relating to SPP. He was sincere. He took me to many colleges for evaluation. He started visiting my house at 7am when we were busy preparing to send the children to school. They ran away from him. Prof Dhawan also talked to me about him. He had a purposeless wandering life, a tragedy.
I started my project on Bangalore water supply in earnest. I had Dr Satyanarayana, a scientific officer, working with me. I put him on the data collection job. He went to all service stations of BWSSB and collected consumption data. 
During that period I also guided a BE projects by a batch of four students. The project was on energy survey. The students were energetic and hard working. I liked their enthusiasm. They met me and I wanted more data. They weren't disappointed, but went with more enthusiasm. I liked their approach. 
After they completed their BE, I decided to give them jobs. I took two of them - Ashok kumar Kattimani and Ramakrishna- and put them in the water project. They worked for about three years on that project. They meticulously collected data. They also pulled out a lot of information from the government archives.They worked hard.
Madhav felt that CES needed a person for working on energy. So I picked Mr Ramachandra, another student in that project and we appointed him in a permanent post in CES. He continued to work with me for two decades. He is still with CES.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
24/02/26, 4:33 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 996
Some comments
H S Nagaraja
"Very valuable inputs for systems analysts & designers. Thank you very much for sharing this sir.By the by have you presented this in any conference or in publications?"
Prof Chakrasali,SDM,Dharwad
"Sir, very insight full article. As applied to academic research, the article is really thought provoking for proactive research.Regards🙏"
Mr M K Srikant
Very nice, a really good read!
Prof Shakti Mishra
Wonderful sir! Core to design thinking.. inspiring that you are contributing even today to young minds! 🙏
There are a few more saying it is useful.
Thanks to all who read it and commented on it.
Let me look at a question that was posed to me by many. Why did Bangalore develop faster and become a leader in electronics and IT?
To me the reasons were many.
1. Culture- compared to other cities in India, the culture here is different. The city consisted of mostly white collar employees. So a great degree of true middle class intellectualism prevailed here. It was a tolerant and unbiased intellectualism compared to another white collar dominant city, Delhi. Delhi intellectualism was political, leftist and elitist.Delhi ignored the middle class. Secondly, Bangalore didn't have a babu culture as seen in Delhi. A good number of people were great and free thinkers. There was a tolerance of castes and communities in those days. People from several communities participated and excelled in the intellectual pursuit. Chennai had a rigid community segregation and that wasn't seen here.
Bangalore welcomed migration.True there are hiccups, but people here live and let others live.
2. Another factor of culture- multiculturalism - multiple languages, multiple life styles, multiple food cultures. There was a lot of cross cultural interactions and cross cultural learning. It is this which made Bangalore a unique city in India. Most cities had mono cultures. Both Chennai and Kolkatta had local Tamil and Bengali cultures mostly. Bombay created a mono culture of its own even though most people were migrants. Delhi had a babu culture.
3. Collaborative spirit. People collaborated on projects. This gave a critical mass in many areas.
4. IISc was leading the country. It set up the first electrical technology department in 1909, the first communications engineering department in 1948 and the first aeronautics department in the fifties. So it produced a large tech expertise and research in these areas. 
5. With the setting up of BEL and ITI, Bangalore was way ahead of other cities in Electronics 
6. The city has a strong science and tech culture. Science and tech education, development, testing and research are strong.
Let me look at the decade 1984 to 1994. I consider this as a major inflection point in both computer science and computer usage. This sowed a seed for Bangalore becoming a silicon valley of India. The multi directional synergy was amazing. Actually start up culture didn't start in 2000 plus. It started with one demand in the electronics industry- the dominant industry in Bangalore in the sixties and not known elsewhere in India- soldering automation and circuit automation. This started in 1966 by Hegde and Golay Company and spanned hundreds of small units. That was the almost unglorified startup culture. So Bangalore attacked the computer's arrival in multiple directions. 
Greetings. Dks
25/02/26, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 997
We are seeing the developments in the computer area during the period 1984 to 94. This period saw a big leap in electronics- moving to VLSI technologies. That meant we were no longer talking about transistors, but large circuits and networks having hundreds of thousands of transistors. An entire computer processor came out in a chip. That reduced the size of a computer occupying a big room to a table- desktop- and reducing the power requirements from kilowatts to watts- directly pluggable systems. That opened the flood gate of computer sales and purchases. So many industries started manufacturing these machines- called PCs, personal computers.
The first part 1980 to 86, we had only 8 bit computers. While many companies like Zenith, Uptron etc sold the computer at a high cost, Eiko came up with an affordable low cost model. I introduced these computers for the APMC at Gadag, in Dharwad district. It came with a lot of fan fare and achieved a big purpose- create a correct valuation for computers. All companies fell in with a price range of about 40000 plus rupees for a desktop.
This period was a volatile period. Both Intel and Motorola competed with each other and brought out better and faster processors. Intel moved through 8086, 286,386,486 and Pentium. With mother board, SCSI, bus,ports etc, assembly was easy. MSDOS was the OS, not easy to use. This gave birth to a large number of manufacturers- both branded and assembled.
Unix came at this time. It was a big innovation- a giant step forward.Motorola 68020 was ported with Unix and I was one of the first to buy it and upgraded it with 68030 and later 68040. Client server model was easy to adapt. Computers reached more organizations, even small industries and banks. It was used for typing, storage and calculations.
Main frames were used by big companies. But servers became common and used by all.
Programming moved to C. C became a standard language. Cobol was used even during this period. But both FORTRAN and Pascal vanished from usage. PL/1 was a flop. 
Software engineering reached a mature state. Production of large software became common. Software did not deal with a single problem. It dealt with a large number of problems belonging to an organization.  It helped in automation- connects to other programs, provides connections to communication networks, links to storage, retrieves and loads data into data bases, connects clients and messengers etc. It became a complex generic engine.ERP is one good example of integration of many large applications. 
Data became independent truly. We have got good commercial database systems like Oracle and DB2. I had serious issues in pushing developers to adapt databases in their system design.Developers who resisted databases before, got converted and felt that applications can not be designed without databases.Again ERP brought out this necessity. Data moved out of programs and when we talk of data, it includes the entire organizational data, customer data, data on economy, supply chain data, shareholders data etc. Data became crucial for the success of an organization. That continues even now.
The Education scene also changed during this period.
Greetings. Dks
26/02/26, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 998
Let me look at the application software scene. While TCS was a dominant player in software services, it also branched into several areas like share and dividends processing, banking, accounting, etc. But it had more jobs abroad than in India. Seeing TCS activities, many other companies like Patni,Mafatlal, Computronics etc jumped into the field. Several companies built specialised software for in house use.But the effort required was high. We were using wordstar for typing.
Many companies like ACC, HMT, ITI and HAL started computerization of accounts, stores and purchase. Mr Balan of ACC was passionate about computerization. Most companies outsourced their payroll to reputed software companies. Application Software was custom built. Standardization was absent. Software practices were poor. I saw a senior person correcting codes and was aghast. Version management was not understood and hence not implemented. Even in TCS, documentation was not attempted. Software remained in the minds of the programmers. Software as an asset came much later. Software as a product was ignored by many and only a few built software products like Tally, word processors for Kannada, EX, etc came later. Software development remained a tinkering activity even in 2000.
Organizational rigidity and poor understanding of the market and service requirements, trust deficits continued to kill many services companies started by reputed companies. Even TVS and Kirloskar failed in this area. Agility was not understood by many. Novices like Infosys succeeded as they had no baggage.
During this period, most companies concentrated on private sector applications. Many private sector- big and medium ones- companies experimented with computers to solve their problems. Most used the outsourcing model.
The government also got into the software business. With Rajiv Gandhi becoming PM in 1984, computers got a favorable treatment from him. NIC which was set up earlier as part of planning played a big role. NIC recruited a lot of engineers ,trained them in programming and worked intensely in developing applications for the government sector. NIC set up units in all states to assist state departments in computerization.
While NIC did a great job in initiating computerization , it couldn't take it forward. The reasons were:
Formalism was not known to NIC. Most programmers worked in adhoc mode. So they were tinkering with applications. Users were not happy. But NIC was nimble, and helpful to the users and understood the reality better.
Power was diffused. NIC had no control with state governments and so had a limited role in implementation.
Centralised control and pressure of output didn't help NIC. NIC never thought of producing software as a product. 
CMC which was set up as a maintenance company also moved into software applications and hardware sales. They also focused on government jobs.
Banks were not using computers for bank work. They were using PCs for office work. RBI wanted banks to use computers for banking. So a committee under Dr Rangarajan recommended branch automation.So some banks moved into computerization only by early nineties with branch automation. I assisted Canara bank with branch automation. Fortunately, ECIL, Infosys and a few others developed a Cobol based software suitable for Indian banks and many banks propagated the software across a good number of branches. Banks built an in house IT department. The more important event was banks going full steam on Cobol training. Some banks trained a few hundred officers on programming. This helped banks later when banks moved to core banking.
The nineties saw computerization picking up a good pace. Most organizations , government departments,R and D labs and engineering colleges purchased computers- PCs and servers and tried to build some applications. The awareness was wide spread. 
Networking by the early nineties increased. Many organizations built a LAN. I designed LAN for Sri Jayadeva institute of cardiology, CPRI, Vidhana Soudha, KPC, and many organizations. I bought computers for many engineering colleges, KREC,and helped in the design of campus wide networking with fibre backbone. Syndicate bank and SBI went for a wide area network provided by BSNL and built a full fledged IT solution.
Details in the next post
Greetings. Dks
27/02/26, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 999
So by 2000, we had a networking system operational. Also by 1995, we had our email system ready. The department of electronics, government of India, funded a major project involving IISc, TIFR and all IITs to set up a global network for emails. ERNET, as it was called then became operational by 1995.Also by 2000, internet became operational. SBI was the first bank to operationalise a full fledged large, networked IT system, developed, designed ,built and operated by TCS- the first major working IT project in the country. It was a great achievement. 
For the first time, we proved to the world that we can do it. There was great skepticism in India and the world that we could not do a major multidisciplinary project involving many latest technologies interconnecting many software pieces and networking thousands of computers. I was even mocked at when I said that a wide area network is feasible in India. Even Dr. Seshagiri,DG,NIC didn't believe me. Mr S S Murthy who was the boss of power systems in CEA questioned me on this. I said,' we have technology, competent engineers, and a slow network. Interconnection is possible.' The state bank project by TCS brought in a positive outlook. Mr Bala of TCS managed the project efficiently.
Similarly, the syndicate bank also went in for core banking by 2000.Mr Samba murthy was the GM in charge of the project. Syndicate bank used the city bank core banking software iflex. Infosys also developed Finacle software used by many banks.
The period 95 to 2000 was a period of rapid development in application software and IT. India graduated in a big way to large software systems and also adopted quickly without time lapse on the latest developments in internet, web, HTML, Java, LAN,WAN, cyber security, data centre etc.IT systems became complicated. We moved into an era of large integrated and complex systems. The expectations by customers shot up. They wanted- good performance, affordable costs, maintenance, security, continuity, reliability,agility and changing functionalities, adaption of new concepts like net banking, mobile banking,etc.
When I taught software engineering in the early eighties, these user demands on software looked theoretical. But by the mid nineties, these became practical necessities and became implementable through an enterprise architecture.
 ERP was used by most companies. Ramco built an Indian ERP called Marshall. 
Indians changed completely. You saw a resurgence. We saw bright IIT,IIM students jumping into this challenge with ease.I found most engineers in many industries - both hardware, networking, security,software and operations- hardworking and eager to learn. There was a sea of change in India. We produced confident, quick to learn and adopt people who were willing to work hard and for long hours. Our engineers accepted challenges. This was a transformed India, no one talks about. I was in the front seat observing, watching and helping in this transformation. I was involved in about hundred plus major projects in several governmental and private organizations, hospitals, banks and educational institutions.
By 1995, India embarked on data centres. Tata VSNL ,Sify and Reliance started building and operating data centres in the country. The culture of hiring space in data centres was quickly accepted and adopted. Most organizations and banks kept their servers in data centres. 
So India was ready to take a leadership role in IT services.Y2K hastened it.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
27/02/26, 6:21 am - You pinned a message
28/02/26, 4:30 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post  1000
Debashis ,ex TCS
"Really very good historical and true story of a gentleman who can vouch how world of automation and computerisation had began its journey and left behind a trail for new generation to get educated. I sincerely read everyday these collections memorable stories of the past that educate me and enhance my knowledge."
Thanks.
Srinivasa Ramanujam, ex TCS, Dean RIT
"Thanks Sir.Recollecting the IT revolution & transformation from 1995 to till date.. that when I started my career.. working for various IT enabling customers across the globe at diversified Industries like Banking, Telecom, Utilities, Insurance etc.,Huge learnings between 1995 to 2005.🙏🙏"
Thanks 
KN Venkatesh, KSCST
"Thank you, sir, for sharing your thoughts, experience, and contributions to our state and country. Today, you've shared 999 posts. Every day, you've communicated with us through your insights and happenings from your young age to the present, and it's still going on. You are an encyclopedia of information, and we should all benefit from your thoughts and take them forward. Please continue your journey on this media so that many academicians, entrepreneurs, and administrators can take your inputs for the development of our state. Thank you 🙏Venkatesh KN"
Thanks
Shammana Balasubramanya, ex TCS
"Greetings and a very good morning to you Sir. Glad to see such a chronology of Indian IT transformation 💐💐🙏🙏"
Thanks
Prof NV Chalapathy Rao,IISc
"always a pleasure to read your comprehensive posts, @⁨Dks⁩ Sir. *#999* indeed . reminds me of how Y2K started and India seized an opportunity."
Thanks
Mrs Rajalakshmi Lokanathan
"Advanced congratulations for the 1000th post Herculean task Multi faceted personality"
Well. Thanks. This is my 1000th post on my long, multi path travel. I never thought that I had so much to write. I am overwhelmed with many staying with me and reading the gibberish I was writing. That encouragement pushed me. 
I remember Dr S Ramakrishnan, my uncle, who predicted that I would definitely write 1000 posts when I was around my 500th post. He is no more physically, but lives mentally in many of us. I dedicate these writings to him.
Greetings. Dks
01/03/26, 4:45 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   1001
Dr Mathur:
"1000 grand enlightening posts, full of rich contents, denoting how IISc grew and how you lead  technology to shape your career. Each post was interesting and a huge lesson for new generations.Congratulations SirDr RN Mathur"
Mr H S Nagaraja
"Good morning sir. Hearty congratulations for completing one thousand posts filled with many valuable inputs to  take home by the readers who are in different walks of life. We are sure you will continue to carry with this activity for the benefit of all. I pray The Allpervading Almighty to shower His choicest blessings on you and your family with peace, health and happiness throughout life. Greetings from HSN🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏"
Prof Rajanikanth
"👍🏻👍🏻🙏🙏🙏1000 posts! Amazing, Sir. Engaging and enlightening."
Mrs Rukmani Anantharaman
"Dear Anna,Namaskarams.Hearty Congratulations on the successful completion of your 1000th post.Both Appa and I were members of your 'fan club' and when I was in Chennai, we used to discuss your posts ,with a great deal of admiration for you .As you have rightly said,his words have come true and he would have been the first person to applaud you today. I imagined that ,on a lighter note,he might have added that your vivid autobiographical reminiscence was like a grand wedding feast, comprising of delicious flavours from various cuisines, in which, every one of us found lots of things to  relish(without any apprehension of indigestion)as it was purely  intellectual nourishment ! In addition to the enjoyment of partaking the sumptuous feast ,we  also  got take-home parcels(bakshanams) of profound wisdom on several life- related issues.That you were able to sustain the reader's interest for a thousand days is indeed a phenomenal achievement. Among all your awe- inspiring  accomplishments,what stands out as invaluable, according to me , is your successful contribution to society through multi- dimensional approaches. Your meaningful and  purposeful life journey has been a great source of inspiration for me.Thank you very much."
Prof Shalinie Mercy, TCE, Madurai
"Hearty Congratulations on your 1000th post Sir. Beyond technology, your posts have given me powerful life lessons — the value of patience, resilience and the importance of mentoring others along the way. Through your experiences, you have shown us how to use technology responsibly and connect research with real-world.Thank you for inspiring us to think deeper Sir.Grateful to you always!"
N Ramanathan
"Amazing to see the daily post has touched the landmark of 1000. It doubtless involved irrepressible energy and continuing commitment, easier said. Regular feedback from readers makes it interactive and more interesting. Not that I follow it everyday but try to do so on most days. I am sure you would never run out of stuff to keep it going. Thank you Anna."
Mrs Rajani
"Anna definitely not gibberish. Such strong memory to recollect in detail and so many valuable experiences strung beautifully and put down for posterity. Amazing."
Prof Karunakara,SSIT
"Sir,Not able to believe we have moved to 1000 posts so fast. Each post enriched us about academy, industry and its impacts on society.  Your posts showed  so much concern to academia and society. The story of how India  succeeded in IT and your insights regarding what is required for future success is a good lesson for younger generation.We wish let this journey continue further.Thanks and Good Day"
Mr D R Krishnan
"Congratulations on reaching your post1000It is an Herculean taskAs I already indicated even newspapers take 5or 6 days off in a year All your posts are interesting and highly educative Your attachment to uncles Sri Narayanan and Dr, S, Ramakrishnan is very deep Regards- D,R, Krishnan"
Thanks to you all and to others for reading my posts regularly without losing interest. Your encouragement took me through these posts. I relived my life. I missed many people ,but they are within me. The journey was pleasant.
Greetings. Dks
02/03/26, 4:42 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1002
MK Shrikant gives a thoughtful comment:
"Great memories, nostalgia, even! There was one school of thought that the developments were so rapid and different from conventional businesses that the bureaucracy was not quick enough to get involved, and that actually helped the IT revolution move faster and wider."
My response:
You guessed my next direction of writing,Srix. What you say is what I observed. But with a twist.Your theory applied in both directions. 
During the sixties, the labor in LIC and railways opposed computers and didn't allow its use in government or factories as they were told that automation will kill a large number of jobs.
During Indira Gandhi's time, it was the anti-computer attitude of government that delayed our progress by several decades, not benign or ignorant neglect. Recall that Prof Nag, a good friend of mine, was removed as the chairman of the Electronics commission because he gave licenses for manufacture easily. That happened in the Rajiv Gandhi era. So it is a three edged sword. 
The anti computer policy of the government eased by mid 1980s when Rajiv Gandhi took charge and when PCs manufactured in India,were available in large numbers at low prices in the market. So most officers felt the potential of the computer not fully but to the extent that it had its uses in computation. They didn't understand its potential fully. Even then TCS had problems of importing computers. TCS brought an IBM mainframe for some customer to India and located it in SEEPZ export zone and used it for a foreign customer. They couldn't dispose of it easily later. That was the rigidity.
Fortunately, Karnataka had a long history of electronics friendly approach. It became computer friendly in the seventies. We set up the first government computer centre in early 1970s. It ran several applications. Its major task was to rank applicants for engineering admissions and later to allot them to colleges. So everyone liked computers here.
But when bureaucrats became familiar with IT, they played another role of real estate in IT and corruption. They became know all, but still did many activities to take computerization to all corners of the government. We computerised the commercial taxes department in the late eighties. We streamlined computer purchases by introducing rate contract.The bureaucrats realised the power of computers in administration and its capability to control the people.
Let me give you one example to illustrate this. In 1987 or so, Mr Ramakrishna Hegde was the CM of karnataka. The PMs office installed a computer by HCL by then. Mr Hegde also wanted a computer in his office. I knew both Mr Balasubramanian, secretary to CM and Mr Gokulram, deputy secretary very well. I had to decide on the computer. So I asked Mr Gokulram on the purpose of the computer. The answer opened my eyes. He said, " many politicians pester the CM on transfers. So he decided to issue transfer orders using the computer and tell everyone that the computer is doing the transfers. He has no role in it." Actually, transfer orders were input into the computer and printed out. But it was helpful for the CM to run the government.
But by and large, the governments followed a helpful attitude. They realised the power of IT by mid or late 1990s. RBI pushed the banks to go for core banking. By 21st century, IT was bigger than the government. Government bowed to IT. Passports, taxes, aadhaar and UPI are good examples.
Thanks Srix.
Greetings. Dks
03/03/26, 4:14 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   1003

Let me continue with my discussions on the IT developments in India and by Indian companies from 1985 to 2000. 
We saw the hardware, software, networking and data centre absorption as they happened in India. 
For a large technology to take roots, we need a number of talented persons- programmers and engineers. Swami Vivekananda put the talent requirement seed to JN Tata which led to the setting up of IISc. But such a development didn't take place in India for computer science in the formal route. Except for TIFR,IISc, IITs and ISI, no university bothered about this discipline. The were blind to the fast paced developments happening in the CS area, a tragedy.
But it was compensated by the mushrooming of thousands of training institutes across India. Datamatics set up a training institute in Bombay and another in Bangalore in late sixties. I was involved with them and conducted about 30 plus training programs each lasting for a month. It helped in generating some programmers. HCL set up NIIT in the early eighties and it quickly spread across the country. It played a big role in training thousands of youngsters. Seeing the job and revenue potential, thousands of training institutes came up even in districts not just the big cities. Most engineering students picked up their programming ,CAD and database skills from these institutions. 
Many companies wanted programmers and approached me to select suitable persons. I had conducted hundreds of interviews and found, in many instances, NIIT trained students more knowledgeable than engineering graduates. I even selected some for foreign assignments.
But by 1986, there was a serious quality issue. Most training was useless. I wrote an article in the Times of India news paper titled- computer alchemists. But still, the training institutions did a reasonable talent development in the absence of talented persons coming from engineering colleges. Later in the early 90s, the government of India wanted to ensure the quality and set up an accreditation body called DOEACC with Brig Sundaram as its chair. I did inspections of hundreds of training centres in bangalore .
The biggest effort came with the setting up of AICTE in mid eighties with power to approve engineering colleges and approve starting of new courses. I was with two task forces - one for Kerala and another for Karnataka. We permitted hundreds of colleges to start CS programs in the beginning and IT later. I inspected most new colleges in Karnataka, Kerala and some in Tamilnadu. So when our IT activities were scaled up by the mid nineties, the talent resources were available due to the scale up of engineering colleges in the private sector.
It is these developments which defined my professional and social paths. These developments in IT in the world governed my research focus. And similar developments in India aligned my professional focus. So these helped me to generate four distinct paths for the next period of my life - about 40 years. I was interacting with people more than technology. I needed to be a behavior specialist and a mind reader. I didn't change my attitude, but most - 99.999% of people that I had interactions respected me and my opinions- even chief ministers. The four paths were:
1. Academics at IISc
2. Computer education in the state and engineering education
3. Professional development of IT in various organizations.
4. Social aspects- energy, environment and education
Lots of opportunities came my way and enriched me and I could help over hundred organizations, banks and educational institutions and also many karnataka government departments. These kept me going till I reached 80 years of age. I will discuss them later. 
Greetings. Dks
04/03/26, 4:11 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1004
I handled a large number of big projects, mostly IT and power infrastructure projects. Hundreds of organizations benefited from my work and advice. I was serious and committed and adjusted my knowledge to the requirements of the organizations.
I realised the following aspects regarding the problems that I handled:
1. Problems are not solved with technology focus and technical skills alone.
Today's problems are complex, use many subsystems and many technologies and are connected. 
The requirements are many- usability, reliability, fault tolerance, scaling for growth, resilience.
2. What is a practical problem? Some say it is a puzzle. I see it as a big set of puzzles, needing discoveries. There is no universal approach, but many steps are useful. 
Remember that a practical problem to be solved does not stop with finding a solution. We need to implement it and make the implemented solution work. It should do all tasks done before but with improvements- faster, less errors,better control, easier, less costly, more efficient and flexible to add more functions.
So a problem is viewed as a project. Consider core banking for a bank. We go through many steps:
Step 1. Establish feasibility- software is available. It meets our requirements. It will execute user transactions faster and without errors. The software is used by other banks. We can train our staff to work in the new environment. It meets our performance needs. Hardware is available. There is a clarity on the gains the bank gets after implementation.
Step 2 decide on whether to develop a software, buy an existing one from the market or buy and modify. Prepare requirements, scope of work, list of functions, technology components etc. Prepare a detailed request for proposals. It is a thinking and time consuming activity.
Step 3. Select a vendor. It is a tough process and an important one.Evaluation takes time. You have to do it meticulously.
Step 4.design and  Implement the project. Define milestones, reviews, progress charts, acceptance tests, inspections etc.
Step 5. Train everyone.
Step 6. Operationalise the new solution by adding more branches into the new system.
3.Problems are not simple, well defined, easy to solve by mathematical models alone. They are games played by several teams supporting or opposing the objectives with many motives. There are many hidden hurdles.
4. Problems are not stand alone, but depend on many sectors, most important being their dependence on people. I am not talking about social behavioural or motivational problems, but about engineering problems. Problems will get answers if solutions consider people's reactions, biases, beliefs, capabilities. Otherwise, solutions will fail and not succeed. The toughest problem to handle is the ego of people.
5. Analysis of a problem will lead to an acceptable, cost effective, feasible and futuristic solution. This involves discussions and decisions on various aspects. We prepare a detailed plan for its implementation. We also prepare a methodology for that purpose. The methodology includes procedures for reviews, progress, change approvals, vendor selections, purchases, time management and other related aspects.
6. Problems become projects for implementation. Multiple agencies may be involved in the implementation. So a proper coordination mechanism needs to be established.
So when I encountered or was involved in solving a major problem like core banking for a bank, a power supply and distribution system for IISc, a IT education for  children in1000 high schools, or automation of a steel plant or a huge government department like department of space or shipping etc, I evolved a set of principles to be followed by me. 
Let us look at them in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
04/03/26, 12:13 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: https://medium.com/@dksubra/indian-computer-scene-1-focus-on-hardware-development-manufacture-and-use-prof-d-k-subramanian-92cab871d64e
05/03/26, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1005
What is the difference between a problem and a project?
Normally we refer to a problem as something that needs to be done in an organization in order to remove obstacles or difficulties or to improve performance or productivity or to reduce cost etc. It does not normally involve routine activities like accounting, designs, budget preparation etc. Examples of a problem are restructuring an organization or a department, estimations for a new product, feasibility studies, cost benefit analysis, etc. Here we restrict a problem to a specific domain or a single well defined task. It is normally an internal activity.
But a project is a major one having a single definable purpose; it is a unique one-time activities; projects are temporary activities with a specific timeframe;they cut across organizational lines to draw from multiple skills;they involve unfamiliarity ;project has a deliverable part; and project means the execution of a set of steps within a specified time frame to achieve a goal. Projects involve money, people, teams, timelines, progress monitoring, development,testing, implementation,installation and operation.
The term project was used initially for construction of houses or industries and later to new technology introduction as it involves major changes in operations and skills.
In order to solve a problem and implement a project, we go through several steps:
1. Understand the various aspects of the problem and solutions. 
Define the current state and deficiencies.
Define gaps and improvements.
Understand the available technologies in the market.
2. Define and describe the problem
3. Prepare a detailed plan of action.
4. Evolve procedures and methodologies for decision making, reviews, approvals, vendor selection, technology evaluation
5. Select technologies, vendors and establish the scope of work and timelines.
6. Start implementation
7. Review, modify, change.
8. Acceptance tests and installation.
Since the projects are complex, we can't follow any rigorous process to attack the problem. I realised that a blank approach is not acceptable. So I thought about this and created a set of general principles that I will follow in making decisions and in building sub processes for review, acceptance etc. Let me explain some of them.
The first is the understanding that all problems are context sensitive. The Core banking approach for a bank was different from that for another bank. So we should study and build in our mind a context universe. My decisions depended on this and not just technological aspects only.
1.know the context of the problem , not just the problem. It means that I should assess the type, structure, culture of the concerned organization, the nature, interest, motivation of the people- management, senior officers, concerned officers, other staff and stakeholders. I should know the technical and financial limits and operating procedures of the organization. This helps me in deciding what should be done?; what solution will be appropriate and how to implement it?; what are the hurdles? Then I should know the market and customers. Then I should know about technology providers.
I encountered several problems while dealing with technology providers. Some are:
1.Some major components are handled by monopolies. For example,it was difficult to deal with oracle. They decide on prices unilaterally without any justification and make you buy a lot of additional items. Their sales promotion was unbelievable.
2. The supplier for the main application program is normally decided. Now the organization has to live the suppliers inefficiencies. The coordination was poor when a novice project manager was appointed and he or she didn't understand the client properly and would be creating tense situations. I have seen this in most cases. On one or two occasions, I had to suggest cancellation of the contract. We normally reach out to the higher ups, escalate the problem and I even suggested solutions. For instance, to improve coordination, I suggested more regular meetings to resolve issues. I even suggested that the project leader should start every day with a 10 minutes stand up meeting and end the day with a brief recap. It worked to speed up the implementation.
3. The project team may not have competent or experienced members. That led to serious mistakes and delays. Members were changed in some instances.
4. As usual documentation concept was not followed- a typical Indian belief and capability syndrome.
This meant that vendor understanding, vendor rating and vendor management are tough tasks and needed to be handled properly for the success of a project.
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
06/03/26, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1006

We are looking at understanding the context as my first principle to understand and discover the problem. We saw the problems with vendors.
Let me now look at the problems with people in the organization. It is a big one and determines the success or failure of a problem. Project leaders need good assessment and judgmental capabilities in order to handle the multiple problems posed by people.
I encountered many problems in dealing with a problem. It is not technology. Let me give examples.
When I was advising a bank on core banking, I sensed a strong opposition from many in the IT department. That was easier to handle as the top management and the seniors in the IT department supported the move very strongly. The DGM had a great understanding of the mood of the staff and officers both at head office and branches. It helped us to devise mechanisms to diffuse the situations created by some.
Again the solutions were not technical. It involved creating champions, keeping the dissenters in the loop- remember the key dissenter was running the existing branch automation and maintaining the software-, recruiting more staff and transferring some to other parts of the bank.
Let us look at a second example.I was involved in developing a major project- computer assisted admin and accounts- for the department of space, government of India. The top management decided to do it in house. But the internal IT head said that it couldn't be done. So I had to work with a group of supporters and work with no cooperation from the internal IT. This was a major project involving the efforts of about 50 people and writing 400000 lines of code. It wasn't easy. But we managed. I built the confidence of the project members. We had regular meetings.The project administrator was very proactive. The top management talked to the teams regularly. The diffused nature of the computer talent was useful in diffusing the tension and building confidence in them.
In addition, the department couldn't get an Oracle database. We had to use sybase. We needed the engineers to be trained in sybase. NIIT did the training for us.
The third example was another bank. It was using a core banking solution which wasn't a core banking solution. I wasn't happy. But the internal support at the higher levels of bank officers for the small company operating the software was very high. Even the IT department was powerless. The company did unprofessional things. This created a monopolistic situation and many difficulties.It took me three years of effort. After a change of two CMDs, it was the third CMD who took the decision to go for a regular core banking solution. That wasn't easy.Even afterwards, we had lots of problems in executing the project. In house expertise was strong and it helped us.
Understanding the organizational culture- transparency, freedom, participation, enthusiasm, cooperation,- is an important requirement.I had to assess this carefully.
Let me give a few examples of organizational culture torpedoing changes in operations. 
I talked about load forecasting with computer models of trend analysis in 1968. The person heading the load forecasting unit of the central electricity authority dismissed my talk saying ,' we don't need these techniques.' The primitive way of load forecasting continued for decades. In 1984, there were discussions on Karnataka's load growth and requirements of additional generation. 
Mr SG Ramachandra projected a 100% growth in 5 years using supply side economics and taking into account energy and power deficits as 30%. His calculations inherently assumed the deficit to grow. On the other side, Prof AKN Reddy used a demand reduction approach and showed that there was no need for additional generation. 
GMCI asked me to predict the load growth. I used the computer trend analysis model and predicted the growth. After 5 years, my prediction was found to be correct. But everyone dismissed my studies.
I talked about load despatch using computers in a power system in 1972. Tatas set up a digital load dispatch centre by then. But all electricity boards rejected that. Only by 1982, the government pushed by Mr SS Murty went for computerised load despatch centres for regional electricity boards. I trained about 100 engineers of CEA and CMC for that project.But the situation is still primitive. Top managements are afraid of computers. Same is the story with the urban water distribution boards. I suggested computerised operations of bangalore water distribution system and computerised leakage detection system in 1985. Both were not implemented for decades.They are averse to computer control in these days of data analytics and AI.
There are many more examples of ERP failures in some industries. Even,IISc couldn't computerise its admin and accounting applications till around 2006 despite decades of effort.
More in next.
Greetings. Dks
07/03/26, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1007
The second step is to study the problem under consideration or the organization or the business concerned in depth to discover the actual problems.
2. Know the current state of the organization.compare it with other similar organizations, study its governance structure. Identify weaknesses of the organization, gaps in current operations, and look for improvements. Study the people,commitments,expectations,in house capabilities, willingness to outsource etc. This is needed to decide on
what are the pain points- performance, cost, sales, competition?
What are the hurdles?
What changes are needed?
What remedial actions are needed?
What will be the impacts and advantages?
What implementation strategy should be?
What technology to be decided?
What is the scope?
How do we implement the plan?
Let me look at an example. In the mid nighties, I had a big role in implementing the Mahithisindhu program of computerization of thousand high schools in Karnataka.
What was my knowledge of the current state?
1. Datamatics corporation was training people from the seventies successfully and many trained persons started working on computers. 
2. In the eighties, many- thousands- training centres sprung up every nook and corner in big cities and by late eighties ,they percolated to small cities also.Private organizations like NIIT,Aptech started hundreds of training centres across India. There was a lot of awareness and enthusiasm amongst people and students. Most students attended these programs. Computer Society of India also ran training programs. Banks encouraged and funded their officers to have extensive COBOL training and they set up IT departments. It was useful later for branch automation.
3. Many individual trainers visited schools regularly and conducted regular training program. This spread across our cities quickly. I was personally involved in the training and advising activities of several schools and colleges. My friend, Mr Hegde,principal of the Gujarathi school in the Majestic area was very enthusiastic and organized my lectures for teachers of many schools. Mr Gopalakrishna of natiinal public school set up a computer centre and ran training and teaching activities.
4.But the problem with government schools was poor.I found that the supply of computers to schools under the class program of the government if India didn't work. Teachers were not trained, were scared to use a computer, didn't know what to do with a computer. So they just kept the computer locked in a steel cupboard. I had seen it in some schools. Even training by IISc computer staff was not effective or useful. So it was a failure.
5.Computer ignorance was prevailing amongst teachers.
6. Schools had poor infrastructure- power, space,communications were non existent in most rural schools.
7. Mr SM Krishna, the CM was keen. Mr Vijayabhaskar, the commissioner of school education, took it as a personal mission with enormous commitment. He spent a lot of time on the project. 
8. Director and senior officers of DSERT were not interested. They kept away.
9. So the burden fell on me and I knew the pitfalls, but being foolish,I accepted.
These understandings were useful in our decisions.Based on the above, we decided to go total outsourcing to reputed companies - a different approach. We wanted to design the program to the last detail- computer configuration, staff requirements, topics to be covered, evaluation methodology, payment approvals, etc. We also decided to get the infrastructure- computer room, power supply, telephones- ready before hand. These decisions helped us to make the program a success.
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
08/03/26, 4:39 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1008
Let me look at more requirements and steps to solve a problem.
3. Do a gap analysis and discover problems.
You know the current state and difficulties seen in the current state. The most important purpose of the problem solver is to define the final state of the organization and also define the deliverables and benefits expected when you reach the final state.
Sometimes, one may go through a few stages of transformation.
Let me discus a few examples here. 
i.Final stage for Mahithisindhu program:
All students get a desirable level of mastery about computers, use computers to solve simple problems, learn to use the Internet and web and email and even operate the computers.
More importantly, increase subject comprehension, increase pass percentage, and improve student enrollments.
ii. Final stage of core banking for a bank:
Create a centralise correct database of all customers. Provide data protection and data loss prevention.
Automate most branch operations.
Facilitate secure transactions at any branch for all customers at a faster pace.
Maintain accounts information correctly. Get all branch reports. 
Provide 24by7 service. Ensure business continuity. 
Introduce more functionalities, net banking etc., support CRM,MIS.
iii. KSSEB processing SSLC results
Correct and faster processing, faster access, better MIS.
No manipulation
Easier database maintenance.
Now let us look at the next step for another hurdle.
4. Know the technology scene- maturity levels, suppliers, implementation difficulties, available expertise in the organization and outside.
While technology understanding is clear and is part of my learning and expertise, technology in the market is a difficult discovery. This needs a lot of effort amidst a lot of non information or partial clouded information. It links technology to developers to managers to service providers to sales people- a big chain with many weak links.
Let me explain. 
I know core banking software is a feasible activity and hence banks decided to go for implementing core banking. 
I know from my technical expertise that core banking will universalise banking, will lead to banking from anywhere, will minimise errors and improve performance. I also know that core banking needs skills to operate the computer, understand the operations, manage the network, modify the code almost daily- to take into account changes in procedures and practices. I also know that bank staff need training and hand holding.
But I don't know
1.what software is available in the market? What are their functionalities? How are they implemented? How difficult is it to modify them to meet a banks requirements? 
2. What is the maturity level of the developers? Who is using the software?
3.How is the service support?
4.What is the trust level? Is the company stable, does it have enough developers and professional competency, has it executed any similar projects, what is the response of the client?
5. How about other vendors- for servers, operating systems,networking, PCs,UPS, database, etc? What is their track record, reliability, serviceability etc?
6. Most importantly, how are the components and subsystems interconnected? Does it allow flexibility to choose any vendor for servers,PCs, networks, media, security?
7. How secure is the system? We found in one case the software vendor using many servers- one with windows operating systems and rejected that company. This led to a lot of discussions in the board meeting of the bank convened to approve our decision on the selection.
8. How is the performance? What are the operational practices followed by the software vendor. I was unhappy with the unprofessional practice of tinkering with the code in the production server directly by one vendor. The bank couldn't stop that practice despite my objections.
And there are many more questions. It is a discovery and investigation process- very rigorous and detailed and difficult. It is known that the company representatives are mostly ignorant of internal technical details and will create false images. Some company reps were arrogant, some told lies and promised everything. It is my job to create a reality picture. That is necessary for smooth operations.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
09/03/26, 4:29 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1009
Let me continue.
5.Crucial decisions. A problem involves taking a number of decisions at different points of time of execution.
Let me give some examples.
In the case of Mahithisindhu program, we took several decisions in the beginning.
The project will be a total turn key project. 
It will be outsourced to a competent agency.
Since we didn't want monopoly, we decided to divide the 1000 schools amongst eligible agencies. 
The selected agencies should take full responsibility for complete execution. No secondary outsourcing is allowed. 
The eligibility criteria should avoid small vendors who can't conduct the program in several districts. Experience clause should be strictly enforced.
Computer purchases will be inspected. The project will have a quarterly inspection.
Dedicated and qualified persons should be employed for each school. No relaxations.
Text books will be approved by me.
All payments are subject to my approval.
Later we agreed to install DG sets in all rural schools.

6. Create a process and operating principles and review them periodically.
7. Know your team- cohesion, talents, commitment, capabilities, support level, willingness to learn,
I normally meet the team frequently in most places. The team is responsible for decisions and success of the project.
8.  Establish fair and transparent processes for selections of technologies, vendors and implementors.Establish a good, transparent governance mechanism.
The outcome of these steps will be the production of a detailed plan for solving the problems and implementing the project with details on progress, time, cost, manpower, reviews, testing and reporting in addition to execution of various tasks.
More in the next
Greetings. Dks
10/03/26, 4:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1010
Some comments:
Dr C Subramanian
"It is indeed a mamath effort to remember happenings over a period of many decades. Reproducing it from the memory with chronological order is much more difficult.You, resp. sir achieved both. Most of us wonder how human beings can possess such extraordinary calibre and also reproduce it ambly clear for the understanding of persons not at all aware of many things that you have been explaining.May your enthusiasm prevail supported by good health.Kudos and many many thanks, Resp Sir."
Dr Dheepa
"I am amazed Uncle, as to how your neural.networks remember every bit.Truly astounding."
Prof P Raja
"Sir, Given your extensive engagement with real-world engineering challenges, I would like to understand your perspective on the teaching and assessment of complex problem‑solving in engineering education. 
Let me look at his questions one by one as they deserve the attention of all. The questions were important.                                                                                                                                  1. At what stage or level do you believe complex problem solving should be introduced within the classroom?        
Please look at the life of a child. It may encounter scarcity, death, disaster and ask yourselves how the children handle the difficult situations? True, the parents will try to shield the children , but how long. They need to know their neighborhood, they need to know how it functions, they need to know why some people are negative, some are helpful, some are abusive, some are angry. They are puzzled. They need to know why there is inequality, why some live in a huge house, some in a hut. So they need to know that human behaviour, nature, economy, family relations are strongly interconnected. They need to know not only the individual parts like family, city, river, forests etc, but more importantly the connections. We need to teach them reality that people are different, their life style is different, their beliefs are different, their wealth is different and these create their attitudes and behaviors. 
The question is- knowing the interconnections is not complex or unnecessary, but a reality. 
Another factor is that our education formalises most life events. Formalization means a lot of assumptions and conditions. That approximates the real situation and we solve them using logic and mathematics. We may get a wrong solution. We need to prepare children for connections.
Physics talks of matter and concentrates on matter. But does it address fields and radiations and waves properly. Feynman says every thing is surrounded by fields. Do we know what is a wave. We say suns rays travel at a speed. Is it real? What are the constituents of suns rays? Why the spectrum? What is the implication- not definition- of frequency? It is still working on it as it refuses consciousness. 
If consciousness is not there, how does radio signals travel over many light years distance? 
So we need to first introduce the concept of multidimensionalism and connections at an early age.
Then we can introduce problem solving with data, experience etc and without math. That is easy. Ask questions:
How do you get food? How do you decide what to eat every day?
Why does paddy grow on some land and not on others? What resources are needed for the success of a crop?
Can a village produce enough food for the people?What are the resources needed?
Where do you get extra food materials from?
How do we live within a limited income?
Where do we get our water from?
Why does someone get angry? etc.
We can frame lots of questions for them to think.There won't be satisfactory answers. But create an understanding of interdependence between monsoon and food supply, human behavior and poor economy etc.
Next make them to learn discovery. Where do you get your dresses from, your grocery items from, your notebooks and books from?
I think the job of education is to build knowledge as close to reality as possible.
So we need to introduce multidimensional problem solving at different levels starting from high school. 
Then we start looking at solving real life problems.Forget about technical problems. Look at the social problems - garbage, traffic, quarrels, fuels,social disparities etc. 
Let me give an example. When I suggested that design should be taught and experimented in stages, a lot of people opposed. Now it is common practice.
Similarly, we didn't introduce social interconnections, human decision making, reading and reviewing, large problem solving in engineering. 
I always said that computer students wrote small programs, not a large program of 50000 lines of code. When I told the faculty in BVB, there was a gasp. I in the seventies made my students write assemblers and loaders. I made my students develop concurrent programs. 
So first remove your beliefs. If you believe that it is necessary, you will ways of doing it. It is urgent in todays AI and data driven world. We have to implement it.
More in the next.
I will look at the other questions in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
11/03/26, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1011
Let me talk about some experiments. We decided in 1975 that engineering students should design and build machines for agricultural operations as well as machines used by small industries. So KSCST started a students projects program. We had some great professors like Ramapriyan at NIE, Mysore, Narayana Rao at MCE,Hassan and Dhotrad at BVB, Hubli. They mentored the students and it led to learning and applying mechanical engineering principles for building useful devices. It showed that students are capable of taking up challenges.
My second example is our focus in 2004 to start a scholar program to build products with multidiciplinary inputs. That is going on even now and supported by our foundation, FAER. This also showed that students in small cities are in no way inferior to students in metros.I am seeing a lot of enthusiasm in AI now. We permit even second year students to participate in this program.
My third example is our technology barrier reduction program. We took eighth and ninth standard students from rural schools and gave them internship in a nearby engineering college for a period of a month. It was a great success.The students picked up a lot.
So I am sure the students from rural areas and poor families are eager to accept challenges and are confident to take up challenges. It is the faculty who have a problem- a crisis of confidence. They think their students are useless. I had heard this comment in most colleges by faculty. They even decry me. They said that I am familiar with IISc students and they are meritorious. They never realized the fact that I had seen thousands of students from these colleges doing good projects. Also they didn't understand the fact that I had conducted courses in more than forty colleges. So I make this statement from my deep experience. We need to accept the fact that even first students are capable of taking up challenges. I saw BVB students conducting social engineering projects in the first year itself. It was great and revealed many facts. Students have energy ,so provide them motivation.
Another reason why students should solve complex problems.
Let me continue on the question of dealing with complex problems and the appropriate time to do that posed by Prof Raja.
The first reason is
Is it necessary to solve complex problems?
Life has become complex. So solving complex problems is a necessary life skill for most of us. This leads me to the next question:
Do we cope with life correctly? Most don't. I observed ten problems we face in our daily life. they are:
Problems1.poor understanding of the functioning of the society, family or an organization
2.poor decision making skills.
3.poor or satisfactory leadership skills
4.poor use of human resources
5. Fairness and transparency.- ambiance and working conditions- empathy and concern.
6.poor improvement in the confidence level of employees.
7.work culture, practices - no freedom Firefighting
8. No encouragement for innovation.
9. Risk aversion.
10. Centralised control even in a household.
All of us know these ailments. I have written several posts to address these. I consider the first two as important for everyone. You agree that both are important life skills and both deal with complex problems. We also know that our school system doesn't address these two skills. So that is the need of the hour.
We should be prepared for this and push this- make engineering modern and complex and multidimensional.
Hope this convinces us. Comments welcome.
Greetings. Dks
12/03/26, 4:12 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1012
Let me look at the second question of Prof Raja.
2.  In my view, many such problems are inherently multidisciplinary—how should we effectively address them both inside and outside the classroom learning environment?         
My response
I agree. I go further and say that engineering is not for engineering, by engineering; it doesn't stand alone; in the 18th century engineering looked at industries as its focus. But with the advent of electricity, engineering moved towards broader applications and got interconnected with industries, commerce, business and people. The bonding with people increased with computers and the Internet.
 Today's engineering is a highly connected system of technologies, industries, business and commerce. Todays engineering is no more just a set of components or parts like machines, motors, refrigerators, pumps etc. It is a complex system comprising hundreds to thousands of parts intricately interconnected. Todays engineering is an integrated, intertwined and architected environment of industries, utilities, businesses, logistics, infrastructure, commerce and services. So the problems it deals with are complex and multidimensional. You can't solve a problem by only looking at the technical aspects of modeling, analysis and synthesis, but by looking at business society, people, technology, governance interdependence.
Electronics engineers learnt this fast. They moved from transistors to ICs to VLSI. Today, electronics focuses on building systems with chips and software and user connections. We talk of raspberry pie now, we talk of buses and ports, we talk of C programs.students build systems for many applications with these subsystems almost effortlessly today. I have seen this happening for the past ten plus years.
What are the realities of today's engineering?
1.Engineering science is mature now. New technologies are developing faster.
2.A product or unit or plant is a complex system. It uses many technologies.
3.It is a highly interconnected system with users.
4.So communications is an integral part of today's engineering.
5. For better and continuous operations, we need status monitoring with IOT.
6. Most operations are controlled by IT. So IT components are integral to engineering. So present engineering systems are called cyber physical systems.Robotics is now part of manufacturing and services.We will see millions of robots everywhere. Drones will play a big role in our activities.
7. Engineering impacts services and people. So today's engineering is a multi disciplinary, multi media and multi dimensional one. So it is beyond disciplines and techniques.
8. Engineering a complex system of systems.
9. AI will be everywhere in a system. Systems will interact through AI.
10. So an engineer is a problem solver, a coordinator,an integrator, an architect, a manager and a planner- a holistic person, not just a technical expert.Technology experts are a small subset of the engineering profession. Tech knowledge is needed to be an engineer at the beginning level.
But our curriculum still looks at parts not the whole. Remember that the whole is much greater than the sum of the parts. So a lot is hidden inside. Unearth them. We should start with an engineering systemic understanding. That is what I wrote in the blog,' discovery of problems through systems architecture'. That should be the starting point for defining a curriculum.
We should start with three courses:
1. Multi dimensional System architectural views of engineering.
2. Multi dimensional problem solving
3.Life skills development techniques.
These three are foundations. 
Divide the curriculum into four parts - 1.principles, tools, designs, analysis , basic units etc
2. Multidimensional relationships
3. Engineering applications
4. Practical problems - discovery, understanding, reality, innovations,
The next step is a big one. 
Shift focus from engineering principles to engineering applications, look at large problems, understand the utilization of the latest technologies, look at the practical issues and discover problems. 
This means spending more time on the field and less in the class rooms. Field does not mean internships, but regular visits, surveys, discussions, analysis of several sectors- finance, water,power,transport,gas,and communications utilities, logistics, security, urban problems, hotels,hospitals, petrol stations, malls,PWD, police, etc.
It means one or two days per week for field visits, and one or two days for practical problem solving. 
Hope it gives information to sufficient depth on question 2.
Welcome comments.
Greetings.  Dks
13/03/26, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1013
The third query from Prof Raja
3. Additionally, do you feel that our traditional assessment methods remain adequate in the current educational context, especially when accreditation bodies now increasingly emphasize competencies related to complex problem solving?                                                                  I would greatly appreciate your guidance on how academia should evolve to meet these revised expectations."
My response
I feel our current thinking on assessment itself is outdated. Our assessment system is the biggest hurdle to reforms.
Let us ask ourselves the question- how did gurukulas assess their students? It was done daily, progress watched every day, the student observed, his absorption seen and his questioning and thinking capabilities are carefully monitored. Once the guru finds that a student has assimilated whatever was taught and learnt, he declares him a snataka- graduate. He anoints him as such and sends him home.
Here AI is a big boon. It can help in assessing every person through discussions and problem solving approaches. It can assess the work done by a student. So exams are not needed. We need to use AI agent to be a help to a student and to assess him and correct him. It can lead him or her to reach mastery. The arithmetic and memory testing exams will die, a great day of deliverance for education. It will no longer be a punishment.
But teachers will feel their weapon of terrorism gone and protest. They have to become humans. It took centuries to remove corporal punishment. Bow is the time to remove this capital punishment- exams. That will do a world of good for students and the education system. Education should produce thinkers and not slaves, good humans not greedy people, happiness and not worries and fear.
Your query about academics adaptation is a timely one. Academics are living and following a path followed by millions before. They should wake up and realize that that path leads nowhere. That is a great ask to teachers-
Wake up to the reality. Forget the illusion you are living in.
Will they do it. As I said, the world will do it, make academics redundant. AI will start running an alternate system. People will move towards that. Gen Z will beat us completely and tske a march. I want to quote Altman here to warn academics:
Speaking at the Dogra Hall of IIT Delhi, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman warned students that blindly following traditional career advice, especially from parents, could be a mistake in a world being rapidly transformed by AI. 
 "I think listening to old people is the biggest mistake young people make. You will have to quickly develop your own intuitions and trust them. The traditional career advice is probably not going to work as well," Altman said.
Altman warned students against relying on older generations to predict the future of work.
That is a sensible advice. We carry very large baggages of wrong, useless beliefs. They don't. We lost intuition. They didn't. They are fresh with open minds and great energy and enthusiasm.
So we need to wake up to this reality. All teachers need to attend a one-year program to reinvent themselves to become more intuitive, more aware, more humanistic and more thinking. Most important- break all rules; frame new rules.
It is with heavy heart I write this. We should be leaders. Despite our archaic education system, we are producing leaders. That is due to our tradition supporting intuition and tacit knowledge.This is serious.
Greetings. Dks
14/03/26, 4:38 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1014
Some comments:
Prof P Raja
Good morning. Excellent narrative and details sir.
Thanks.
Rajan
Good morning dr sir. All these points may be in bits and pieces in different peoples mind. But you are interconnecting them into a nice fabric. A multidimensional one. Very insightful and interesting. 🙏
Thanks Rajan.
Debashis
Every time I am going through your posts , I get to know newer information in each post. Now if we follow the flow of the texts that you post it gives me a clear picture of your unfathomable contribution to societal benefits through technology and management. Besides that the texts gives a historical background of progression of technology advancement and its adoption in practical fields. In summery  I wish to express my opinion - these pieces of blogs should present us a high quality book - give or take.
My remarks:
Thanks Debashis. I agree with you. I am writing all these with the hope that some faculty who read this will pass it on to their colleagues and students.I am not sure how effective I have been to achieve that objective. 
But I am very happy that most read my posts for three years. It is amazing that many read without getting tired or bored. I am extremely thankful to all of you for your encouragement. That is pushing me further to write. The comments and queries are great source of inspiration for me. 
When I started these posts, I was unhappy with people forwarding others posts or greeting with good morning. I wanted to change that attitude. I wanted to give some information - useful or thought provoking and dealing with our society and country. With that I starting the daily posts. Initially,I focused on engineering education. Dr SV Raghavan took the initial posts and published them in the CSI journal. I wrote about 300 posts. 
Then I posted about 500 posts on Hinduism. That got a good response.
 Then I started this journey of 84 years in the past - how we were, how I changed, how the society changed, how education changed, how power, energy, IT, environment, AI, changed us etc. I am glad it went on without disruptions. It is the thrust by a bigger force through a cosmic set of fields. The writings were tempered with reasoning- no superstitions and I refrained from unexplainable phenomena. I read during this period more than 50 books  so that most facts are verified a priori. My experiences are my reminiscences.
Even today Dr. Dheepa commented on my posts. Mr Srinivasan calls me frequently. He also talked about the queries and comments. He is bubbling with questions. 
I am extremely happy with these great enthusiastic responses.
Again thanks to all.
P Raja today
Thanks for the other dimensional view on our assessment system. Again, faculty is the fulcrum to turn around it.
My response
I don't think faculty will be the monarchs any more. AI governance will check them. They need to transform to a guru's role not a simple transmitter of partly dated and obsolete information. They need to understand that golden days are over.
There is a proverb. You can take a horse to water but can't force it to drink water. It has to do it. That is the state of our faculty. They are in a good comfort zone and happy to be there. It needs a lot of effort to dislodge them. All agencies like AICTE ,UGC, universities and rating agencies look backward and can't change the system. Remember the same faculty go there. It is a highly close network without external inputs. How will that system solve complex multidimensional problem. No chance. 
Look for alternatives. Coursera is a good model. We need a similar model with industry support.Faculty alone won't be able to do it.
Prof karunakara
"Sir,It is time to Change or perish. Higher education has come long way but old practices still prevails. Unless we make  change in higher education, especiaslly science, Engineering and medicine and train them to solve new challenges and problems our graduates become showpiece. Many conclave of vice chancellors has not yielded anything. Our evaluation making them champions in rot learning. Way back in early 90's, BU introduced microprocessor and its applications to mechanical engineering branch-a good move,    but it was removed due to opposition of college s/faculty.     NEP is expected to bring some reformation, but is not visible.  It is time for us to move from mono disciplines to multidisciplinary education system. Who will bell the cat?Thanks and regards"
Agreed, Karunakara
Thanks Raja and karunakara
Greetings. Dks
15/03/26, 4:19 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1015
Let me return to IISc. Many things happened in 1983. We saw that we completed our house construction and did a house warming ceremony. My father came for the function. That was his last visit to Bangalore.
This is also the period when the government of India decided to modernize four regional electricity board's load despatch centres. I played a major role in teaching both computers and power systems for three batches- a hectic work. My effort of computer control of power systems started in 1971 was seeing the light of the day. But miles more to go.
I also spent a lot of time with TCS designing the sysgel activity.
At the department level, I started work on transactions processing and distributed systems.
I was selected for a summer course on renewable energy conducted at ICTP in Trieste. It was a one-month program. So I went to Trieste and completed the program. I stayed in an apartment on rent and went by bus to ICTP.I had bread for the breakfast, lunch was pasta and I cooked dinner - just rice. 
During this program, I visited Venice and some villages. 
After completing the program, I went to Zurich, Switzerland to visit and know about the load despatch computer control systems being built by Brown Baveri. Mr Srinivasa Rao from CEA was undergoing training there. I spent a day and then went to Neuchatel, gave a talk and left by train to Milan and then to Trieste. I picked up my luggage and went to the airport to go to Rome and then to Delhi.I returned to Bangalore from Delhi.
My first introduction to public work started with my becoming the chair of the computer society of India, Bangalore chapter in mid 1984. I took charge from HS Nagaraja. We organized a number of programs. We were entrusted with organizing and conducting an international conference on CAD/CAM/CAE for industrial progress. It was sponsored by IFIP and Gen A Balasubramanian was handling IFIP affairs in India. He made me a member of TC 7 on systems. Prof Rajaraman was the technical chair and I became the organising committee chair. It was a big start. We started with a call for papers.We decided to conduct the conference in the Taj hotel. At that time, that was a big one with a large hall capable of 700 people. I set up an office. Eiko gave us two computers. We got a tremendous response. More than 500 people registered for the conference. It was a great success. Both RNarasimhan and Gen A Balasubramanian attended the conference. There was one small problem. One of the speakers was from Canada. In the beginning of 85, the Airindia flight Kanishka from Canada was attacked and crashed killing all the people on the flight. So the speaker got scared and we had to find a replacement.
Prof Ramaseshan wanted to get outside experts to review the working of Computer science and computer centre. Prof Nag, Director IIT Bombay, Prof PVS Rao, TIFR came as experts. It was october 1984. We at CSI wanted to falicitate them and organized a program. My treasure Venugopalachar was a police officer in the police computer centre. He came to see me on that day and said that Indira Gandhi was killed by her body guard. I alerted both professors Nag and Rao and they left for home hurriedly. We canceled the function. We had another CS committee visiting us afterwards with both Prof PCPBhat from IIT Delhi and Prof Reddy from Hyderabad university. I was taking care of them. I was in the guest house to see that they were transported to the airport. The PRO goofed up and they went by other transport. I informed the director. He was upset about the lapse of our PRO.
More in next. 
Greetings. Dks
16/03/26, 5:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1016

We are in the year 1984-85.
I consider 1984 85 to be first turning point in the Indian computer scene. The price of a computer came from ten million- a crore- rupees to a few lakhs - hundred thousand- rupees, a hundred fold change. It came within the range of mid size organizations, colleges and government offices. Further, the price was coming down every day and computer power was increasing. Affordable, very inexpensive systems were available in the market. So this generated enormous interest amongst all people. This gave me a lot of opportunities to help hundreds of organizations with advice and selection of computers.
Initially computers were used mostly for office work and accounting, the fascination was the printer. Most offices had computers and copying machines- that was modernization. File systems came later when sizable storage units were available, initially it was floppy disks.
That led to an explosive demand for talented persons- from programmers to operators to maintenance persons to system designers. Training institutions couldn't handle this situation. So I focused on engineering colleges in order to propagate CS education. So my life started in two directions in addition to my academics, research and IISc involvement which was always my first love.
During this period, another big social activity began for me. It was an explosion.It was my strong association with engineering colleges and propagation of computer science to students and faculty. It was a long 35 years journey. I instilled the knowledge of computer science to thousands of students and faculty in normal engineering colleges, instilling algorithmic thinking. It was a fruitful journey.I visited several engineering colleges and gave lectures on topics of computer science.
It opened a series of big and time consuming activities, bringing me in contact with hundreds of faculty in engineering colleges. This took my involvement with engineering colleges to a higher level beyond my involvement with KSCST's SPP visits.
I understood that while IISc students were intelligent, a sizable number of engineering students in the normal colleges in small towns were very keen to learn and were very well behaved. I found many bright students in many colleges. There was a lot of excitement amongst students.
 It started with my intense involvement with lecturing at engineering colleges.Prof Viswanath, principal of GIT, Belgaum invited me to lecture his students on computers. I was also invited by SDMCE, Dharwad and I gave a series of lectures on operating systems. 
I was invited by Prof Prithviraj, of the IEEE chapter at MIT to conduct a two day workshop on UNIX operating systems. That was the first course on UNIX in India.  Later, I was invited by Prof A Prabhakar, principal,MIT,Manipal to teach courses on data structures and OS for his ME students. 
I visited KREC,Surathkal from Manipal and lectured to the ECE students.
I visited REC, Trichy and conducted a course on distributed operating systems.
I helped Prof KA Krishnamurthy, head of ECE, Malnad college of engineering, Hassan to start a new ME program on computer communications. I started teaching data structures and operating systems to the first two batches of students. This association continued for several years. Our friendship was close till his death.
I visited Andhra university on the invitation of Prof Radhakrishna murthy and delivered many lectures. I became a UGC visiting lecturer and spent two weeks at SV University, Tirupathi teaching a course on operating systems. 
During the international conference, I met both Prof R Srinivasan and Santhanakrishnan from TCE, Madurai. That was my first contact with TCE after 1964 - a period of 20 years has elapsed. They invited me to Madurai to give a series of lectures to their students. That started my long association with TCE. These were strong starting points for my involvement in promoting computer science education mostly in Karnataka but also in Tamilnadu and Andhra.
Later I taught at BDTCE, Davangere during Prof Bhandari's time , NMAMIT,Nitte during Sridhar Hegde principalship, and many other colleges and universities. It is a big list.
By December 1984, I moved to the Institute campus in E quarters. Children could go to school and play with security. From 1984, I stayed in the institute till retirement.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
17/03/26, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   1017
My father had a serious heart problem in late 1984 and was admitted to the Isabella hospital in Chennai. I went there and he was enquiring about the quarters. He was treated with medicine and no surgery. The cardiologist who treated him belonged to the old school. Angioplasty was not recommended by many for diabetics and bypass was a difficult surgery and done at expensive Jaslok in Bombay. So after a few months of suffering. he passed away in April 1985. I was there in Chennai visiting him and he had intense pain and before we took him to the hospital, he died. I completed his rituals. My uncle from Tirunelveli came and stayed there to help us through the functions till the thirteenth day.Afterwards,I returned to Bangalore.My athimber, S Aiyaswamy also helped me during the functions.
After I completed the international conference in june 85 , I became busy with several conferences. I also became involved with the Institution of Engineers, karnataka centre as a committee member. I gave lectures at CSI,IE and IETE. In 1985 end we conducted the first science and engineering conference of CSI. Then we planned for a very novel experiment in 1986- the first and major international conference on Samskritam and AI based on Riggs paper. It was held in Sankar Mutt in Chamrajpet. It needed a lot of effort and thinking.More on it later.
There was another turning point in my life. Mr PJ Nayak was the additional secretary in the planning department. He was upset about the functioning of the government computer centre. It was losing credibility. It had two directors from navy, both were not able to run the centre properly. So Nayak came to KSCST one day and we discussed the problem. I told him the future would be computer dependent and we need to revamp. We decided to set up a technical advisory panel. It was a big move. It guided the state during the era of many chief ministers.It had lots of birth pangs in the first two years and then it moved forward helping the state to lead the country in computerization. I played a big and lead role in this till my retirement. I was party to many decisions. We streamlined procedures, allowed computerization, helped in the development of software packages, created purchase procedures, introduced the concept of rate contract, got LAN built in Vidhana soudha and MS buildings and many more things.  I guided many government organizations in developing computer infrastructure. As part of this TAP I assisted several government organizations like KSCST, Karnataka power corporation, Mysore Paper Mills Ltd, Karnataka state road transport corporation, Bangalore dairy, land army corporation, karnataka state secondary school examination board, DTE, Bangalore university, and many more organizations. 
We realised by 1986 that Karnataka government computer centre can not handle the large number of jobs generated by various departments. KGCC was doing only two activities, but I expected hundreds to come up. Already , we were discussing the computerization of the commercial taxes activities in a big way.So we felt that computerization should be left to the individual departments. This reduced the role of KGCC. This was at a time when companies and organizations were setting up centralised IT departments. We went the other way. We thought that individual motivation and efforts by officers will flourish the computerization activity.
We also realized that in house software development won't happen and we should out source software development to other agencies. Initially ,it was given to NIC, CMC, and other government agencies, but soon it was opened up for private companies to build and operate software for government organizations.
Greetings. Dks
18/03/26, 4:43 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   1018
Mr Rajan comments on the last post - our computer work for the state:
"Good morning sir. Tremendous recollections sir. Lot of learning’sFor people like us."
"Sometimes, it is some small sentence like “others were setting centralised computer departments. We went the other way”…. When i question myself whether one of my decision is right or wrong, these kind of statements from your article makes me feel comfortable with my decisions. 🙏🙏🙏"
My response
It is a very impactful statement. I am glad you got it. It was a strange situation - PCs were available in plenty at low cost reaching to lots of people. So it should lead to diffused computing activities at the lower level and not centralised. But on the other hand companies were growing bigger and they depended on large volumes of data. They are getting connected geographically to their offices and plants as well as suppliers. Software is becoming complex. Operations of mainframe and networks needed expertise of a high order. Software needed regular updates. So companies and banks set up IT departments. The budget was high. So decision making had to be done at a higher level. These departments couldn't retain talent. They could only handle planning and purchase of IT systems and not handle building them. So outsourcing started. Outsourced companies prefered talking to one person - IT and not individual functional units. That was a big mistake. Many projects failed because the user requirements were not understood. 
Let me recall a situation in 2003. A major government department had given a contract to a company to build its ERP sofware- a custom built one. The company built the software without consulting the users, not understanding users capabilities and not knowing the requirements. We had to reject the software and cancel the contract.
By 2005 or so with the arrival of social networks, mobile smart phones and cloud, the focus of IT shifted to users from a centralised system. The central IT department was powerless. I anticipated a similar situation with computerization in 1987. Development should be initiated and monitored with users involvement and approval. One major success was the computerization of commercial taxes and excise. It was done by the department with usage by department staff. It was a success.
This is what I said in problem solving steps- awareness of the context. There are very few universal rules in IT. Adapt to the situation. But CEOs love control and won't give away malicious pleasures of holding approval power. 
The local level empowerment has made startups a success over traditional monoliths.
Thanks Rajan for highlighting this.
Greetings. Dks
19/03/26, 4:41 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1019
Happy Ugadi to all.
"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way..."
Charles Dickens       Tale of two cities
There is some confusion about the point discussed in the last post. I didn't say or more correctly, judge that centralization is wrong. I don't do value judgments. Our biases, our beliefs and our perceptions should not force us to a rigid conclusion.Value judgments should be avoided.
Before we take a decision, we should do a holistic assessment.We should know our people, our organization, culture and governance, our types of jobs, our customers, our stakeholders, market, technology, economy and society - a very holistic assessment of reality as it exists -, through experiences, reading, discussions, data analysis and introspection. That is a pre requisite to arrive at a decision.
Let me look at it from a different angle - how do I decide then?
We need to forget the following strong and dogmatic beliefs.
1. Organizations are governed by universal principles. Even science goes for axioms and universal theories. One size fits all is wrong. Sometimes, order,stability and uniformity lead to uniform rules across an organization. Everyone obeys them. That is what Ramayana tells us. Rama, the maryada purusha follows all rules. He is seen as an ideal person.But it doesn't always work. 
Look at Mahabharata and Krishna. Krishna doesn't follow rules and breaks rules. He even defines his own rules.That helps him to create a righteous country, and right ways of ruling. He ignored rules that are uniform, static, omnibus, applicable to all at all times. As a dean, I did that. I told my deputy registrar," you follow rules and I break the rules when necessary."
When I joined IISc , we had very few rules, departments were independent. But centralised power hunger encircled us with rules, made us slaves, delayed approvals, asked silly questions and it didn't improve the functioning of the institute or speeding up our research. Fortunately, academics was in our hands and we did what we wanted and survived in a global competition.
In today's environment of uncertainty, fast changes, complexity, we need a lot of flexibility, not rigidity and universality.
2. Organizations should be controlled centrally. This leads to delays, wrong decisions, biased decisions and poor transparency. Power corrupts.
Then what is the role of organization. The core act is arriving at decisions for the benefit - survival, happiness and prosperity- of an organization. So the control should not hinder any of these but aid them. So create appropriate control structures. Trust and empowerment are important. Strong strategies- not fixed but dynamic- and good feedback systems are more important, not approvals and permissions. People should be free to think and act with a goal in mind. Again, this is subject to organizational culture. You see the mistake of Apple board in removing Steve Jobs from the CEO position and its after effects.
3. Organizational structure should be rigid. This is not true anymore. Organizations may need flexibility, may need a change. Our government finds an alternate solution. It sets up special centres or special purpose vehicles. It came initially with public undertakings and later with SPVs. Even Tatas were bound by rules. So they set up Tata consulting engineers first and TCS later. Mr Kohli devised a new structure for managing the projects. Prof Dhawan, director, IISc,  created separate centres, units and labs to nurture innovation and develop new and emerging areas. He felt that existing departments can't focus on new areas of research.
4.There are also policies and procedures for taking decisions, for purchase, for promotions and for operations.  These are mostly static, copied from other organizations or governments. Do we ask why are these rules or procedures? Are they relevant? Why are they there?
We don't change them. Even today banks have a high hierarchical system- CMD,ED,GM,DGM etc-. Why ? Can we answer this? Are these positions relevant or necessary? We see some colleges having too many admin bosses controlling faculty.I saw in a college an attender was carrying information about faculty to the management and faculty were afraid of him. I have seen hundreds of such examples.It is counterproductive.
In one institution, the director spent 15 minutes questioning an employee requesting one day's casual leave. Do we know what is important and what is not?We do many things which may not be necessary. Think and eliminate unnecessary activities. Delegate.
5. What is the role of an organization? It is here that we have a poor understanding- flashy office, professional conduct, security, secrecy is one set of understanding. Profit, productivity, discipline is another set of understanding. The organization provides a working place.
Well, that is not the role. An organization is not an office or a hierarchy of people. It is a group of people and their role is to come up with ideas to build and grow their activities and make them produce something useful to some section of a society with a commitment to nature and humanity.
6. What are the main requirements of an organization? Discipline, work culture, control, fear, productivity, commitment are normally assumed aspects. But we need something different and more- enhancement of the minds of people, service to society, happiness, collaboration, active thinking, learning, enthusiasm etc.Organizations should build humanity and lead towards better societies, not just money making units. They should be places of peace and calm and not of tension and worries with daily firefighting activities. They should encourage thinking and creativity.
If we understand these, we will become innovative and active people. Organization is a means. With work from home, online collaboration, econferencing , online meeting rooms, the concept of organization needs to transform.
Remember, the USA lost its huge manufacturing activities by chasing profits. So their concepts of organizations are wrong. Look at organization as a soul of a company.
Greetings. Dks
20/03/26, 4:31 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    1020
Mr Rajan
'Dr sir, it would be nice to hear your experience in the topic, “swimming against the tide” where u have taken decisions like the above (against general trend) and what issues have you encountered and how did you overcome them ? This will be super useful to startup’s because startup’s are supposed to disrupt the general trend. But the challenge we face is, swimming against the tide: hence this request 🙏'
My response
Understand that those who swim along the tide and even those who pluck a low hanging fruit are ordinary people. 
If anyone wants to get into a startups activity, he can't be a normal person. He is first and foremost a thinking and cerebral person, not a mechanical copy paste guy.
Secondly, he shouldn't be foolhardy. He should have viveka to discriminate between good and bad, easy and difficult, doable and not feasible, acceptable and not acceptable etc.
Third, he should be aware of the market, people, society and their needs. He should talk to people, consult,read and discuss regularly.Deep listening is a requisite quality.
Fourth, he shouldn't be afraid of challenges that will appear in his path. It can be technical, financial, work pressure, failures, time management,customer satisfaction , market changes, and even disasters. Try to understand the challenges. Don't be blind to the circumstances.
Fifth, he should anticipate the future course with some level of confidence. 
Sixth, he should plan in detail his paths and be flexible enough to change some aspects of your plan. Flexibility comes with reviews and feedbacks. 
Seventh, he should know his priorities. This is a weakness I see in some.
Eighth, total focus and concentration are essential. Think it is not a well run company. Innovate at every step.
Ninth, don't lose hope. Hope and positive thinking are necessary for success and for leadership. 
Tenth, he shouldn't be a diehard specialist and a lover of his area. Outward looking and general approaches are essential for success, more than expertise in an area. If you are a specialist, your universe is small and you get stuck with a product. You don't get out of it. Initially, ecommerce guys focused on technology and didn't understand market and failed miserably. Many single product companies are not doing well as compared to multi product ones. Diversification means safety. It is a good ring fence.
So start with a caution to meet the challenges.
Life implies that we get challenges. We should first accept that fact. This is true for all. We may decide to run away or face it. Those who run away from challenges become slaves and followers. In the present day world of AI, data, digital, uncertainties and complexities, everything- people, society, organization and governance- should become cerebral.That is where viveka comes in. The first two learnings are
1.Look for challenges. Don't shy away from them. 
2. Understand the full strength of the challenge. Don't fight against certain challenges like government regulations. This is known as hitting a wall. Avoid whirlpools while swimming. Keep away from sharks.I have seen people going to the court on every single problem faced by them thereby losing concentration on the problem.
Then came the next step- preparation. Swimming against tide needs alternate paths. Expect the path to have impediments. Look for alternates.
Expect challenges like customer acceptance or rejection, satisfaction, price and market fluctuations, technology changes, business disruptions, regulation changes, global turbulence, government policy changes etc. So create a list of problems you may encounter, list them, assess their impacts, find alternate paths. Prepare a detailed regular plan and contingency plans. 
To invoke a contingency plan, one needs an alert system. This is missing in many challenging businesses. Most have gut knowledge. That is not enough. Build an estimation system, a feedback mechanism, an alert system, a regular learning system that no school teaches. All these are missing in current business systems to a large extent. Looking outward us more important than looking inward and doing firefighting. That is what most are doing now. Build a ring fencing system for this purpose. You don't start swimming only with confidence but with wisdom, viveka, advance knowledge, prepared alternate contingency plans and constant assessments and reviews and corrections.
As I said before multi product thinking is missing in many startups today. Some diversify within business. Some look at technology and ignore business. Most ignore market trends. While swimming against tide is good, swimming against market is risky. We need to understand it.
Let me continue with the drawbacks of our people that doesn't help in being prepared.
Thanks Rajan.
Greetings. Dks
21/03/26, 4:28 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1021
Drawbacks hindering us from getting the thinking and mind needed for a stratup activity- let me call it as startup mindset.
Unfortunately, our lifestyle and our education have created us into beings with some disadvantages.
1. We look at the past mostly and comfortable with the past and not the future. But the future is where business is.
2. We are focusing on specialization without realising that your area is connected to people, their habits, behaviours, society, economy , global effects, geopolitics, governments etc.Reality is different from specialised knowledge. Our education creates silos and forgets integration. It misses out connections. Even where we learn connections like power network, the connection was internal, not external. Connections to business, people and economy are not taught.So learn connections and relationships.
3. We look at technology only. Project view is absent. That leads us through the path of realization.
4. We look at single product. Diversity has to be cultivated.
5. We focus on our product, don't know the world, the pitfalls.
6. We wait for disruptions. Don't anticipate it.
7. We have one view but problems have many views, many solutions. One size fits all doesn't apply now.
6. We look inward. But we need to look outward to know the ever changing reality.
7. World is changing. Nothing is static. Be aware of the pulse of the world.
The first step is to become a free and open thinker.Lots of constrained thinking happens due to three factors:
One, our beliefs.
Two, our education.
Three, our past experiences.
Question your belief system periodically. Change when needed. Listen for better understanding with an open mind.
Read daily,introspect, consolidate your learnings. Know the context. Introspection retains the essence of learning and connects the dots.
Break constraints. Allow a free flow of imagination. That generates ideas, products and alternate paths. Imagination is a powerful tool for startups but be skeptical. Do a serious feasibility study of ideas or products.
Greetings
Dks
22/03/26, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1022
Let me return to IISc and look at the major project that I took up in 1984 in IISc. I was the chair of the power committee. I found power interruptions were increasing. The 11kv incoming KEB power station supplying grid power to IISc, located near our gymkhana got connected to BWSSB jewel filters pumping station at 18th cross and to BHEL in addition to IISc. Initially in 1969, it was agreed that it would be exclusive to IISc. But by 1983, the power supply station was overloaded. So power supply to IISc was interrupted frequently.
One day, the then registrar, Mr Venkatramiah told me that I got the 11kv in 1969 and the institute was happy with the power position. He said that I should do something that the power position in the institute for the next 20 to 30 years would be good and trouble free. He pleaded with me. I felt it a reasonable request. I was moved by his request. By that time, Mr Thimme Gowda came back to the institute on deputation from KEB.
We started looking at options. I felt that increasing the capacity of the 11kv substation of KEB was an obvious and easy solution, but it would be only a short term solution. Recall that I did the design of Delhi's electric supply system in 1977. I proposed that Delhi should move to 66kv after a lot of studies and observations. So I thought 66kv supply to IISc would be a great long term solution.
Bangalore didn't have any 33kv lines. It had a small 110kv network. Our neighboring CPRI went for 110kv but had problems in getting reliable supply, but I wasn't aware of it at that time and came to know about it later.
The government was developing a new area called Sanjay Nagar, but popularly known as dollar colony. The sites were reserved for rich and dollar-paying people. So we found out that KEB was bringing in a big and new receiving station - 220kv/66kv. The station was about four kms distant from IISc. It was our luck. The major station was just then coming up and 66kv feeders were available. That information was obtained by Mr Thimme Gowda from KEB.
So we decided to put our claim. We met Mr Govindappa, ED, KEB and discussed with him. He agreed to reserve one feeder for us. 
Now my other struggle had started- to get our directors approval for this project. I talked to Prof Ramaseshan. He was not keen on it. He didn't see the need for it. He had other priorities. I was not happy. I waited. 
In 1984-85, Prof Ramaseshan retired and Prof CNR Rao became the director. I told him about the power situation. He mentioned it in the next chairman's meeting. 
Let us continue in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
23/03/26, 4:07 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1023
Somethings to mull - returning to the Indian concept of swadhyaya
"In a fast-changing world shaped by AI, volatility and information overload, the ability to understand and regulate your own mind is a key competitive edge.Leaders who cultivate inner stillness create space between events and reactions, leading to clearer thinking, better judgment and less reactive decision-making.Technology will surpass humans in speed and volume of knowledge, but the human edge lies in consciousness itself — awareness, compassion, ethical judgment and creativity born from silence rather than algorithms."
From what I told him, Prof Rao understood that the institute power supply was overloaded. The next time I met Prof Rao, I told him the advantages of going for 66KV supply from KEB. He was asking me for an express feeder from KEB. I told him that we would be amongst ten or twenty consumers if we moved to 66KV. But if we augmented the 11KV supply, we would be one amongst 10000 consumers or more. We get submerged in the consumer pool. We won't get a proper attention from KEB and the supply station near Gymkhana can't meet our increased requirements. At that time, KEB was not planning to expand that substation. So we would be suffering.Further, the 11KV augmentation would be a short term solution for may be another five years. Then we need to find another solution. 
My statement that we would be one amongst 10 consumers appealed to him. We didn't have a comfortable relationship, but he accepted my decisions many times and entrusted several tasks to me like both Prof Dhawan and Prof Ramaseshan, the predecessors to Prof Rao.He gave a green signal. All these discussions happened not in the director's office, but on the road. Decision of great relief was taken in the nice climate amidst a number of trees in the road near IPC department.
So I decided to go ahead with the planning activity. Conversion was not a simple activity. There were many issues to be resolved. The 66kv supply station was not fully ready. Mr Govindappa told us that the station would be operational in a years time. Since our project would take more than a year to be executed completely, I was hopeful that we would get 66kv power to IISc. While I took the most important decision that the future supply to IISc should be 66kv, that didn't end my decision making activity. I needed to look at several issues like-
1.Estimate the  load growth of the 11 existing 11kv/440 volts substations and loads of new buildings planned including the super computer?
2.What new substations were needed?
3.How should we augment the internal 11kv ring main?
4.How should we bring the 66kv supply from KEB station to the institute? It had to come through public roads and also one plus km inside the campus.
5.Where should I locate the new 66kv substation? 
6. Should we extend the 11kv ring to two parts of the campus outside the main area and across public roads? Our campus is a divided one. We have the main campus- a major area housing all academic and research activities and three other parts. Gymkhana was across the Tumkur road. Housing and the kendriya vidyalaya school were in the north part beyond the Mathikere road. In the south, we have the ICE area housing the high voltage labs, consultancy centre, KSCST, and SID.
We decided to get a detailed analysis and design to be handled by a competent agency. We knew the Esquire engineers in Madras and decided to entrust the work to them to prepare  both cost and load estimates , to develop the power networks, design the 66kv/11kv substation in detail and also design additional stations and workout a plan to get connecting line from the KEB station to our new proposed 66/11kv station.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
24/03/26, 5:26 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1024
We spent months with the engineers from Esquire engineers to iron out many aspects. I addressed their queries and posed our requirements. They visited the IISc grid, got a personal knowledge of our system and prepared the drawings. We identified the location for the new 66kv station, chose the capacity of the transformer - 5 MVA to meet the load growth for the next 10 years, and decided on the number of 11kv panels and feeders. We identified the new substations. 
We decided to get power from the KEB station by an underground cable outside the institute connected to an overhead line inside the campus. The total distance was about 2.5 kms. We decided to go for two separate tenders- one for the internal systems and another for the external underground 66kv cable including erection. We drafted detailed specifications for transformers, circuit breakers, panels, the substation, earthing,11 kv cables, jointing methods etc.We put a condition that all items should be inspected and tested in our presence.I visited their office in Chennai to approve the drawings. So with all these our tender documents were ready.
I should reveal an important factor here. All decisions were not technical. Human involvement and human understandings and interests were vital for arriving at acceptable decisions. I had lots of problems with people. When we identified the location for the incoming 66kv station. It was in the open area opposite the then CEDT building. CEDT faculty were not happy. Later, CES wanted the space adjacent to our station. I had to tell them 'sorry.Not possible.'
Similarly location of the new 11kv substation for the new supercomputer centre was proposed in the basement of the building. So I had to call Prof Rajaraman for the meeting of the power committee. I told him that it won't be permitted due to fire hazards to locate it in the basement. I said we would locate it outside. He agreed immediately.
I spent several days on the cost estimates as I realized it to be a big point. The initial cost came close to 2 crores. We reduced it to 1.5 crores. Later, we had discussions with CPWD as they had to approve our tender document and cost estimation and convinced them. I had to go to Delhi to talk to them and convince them. I got the budget sanction from the director within a few days and started the process of preparing a detailed tender document. I believe in strict eligibility conditions for selecting a suitable vendor. We used a two part tender- technical and financial parts.
Since I put an essential condition that the tenderer should have experience in building and operating many 11kv substations, many local electrical contractors working in the institute and many contractors working on our buildings - a good number- were upset. They met Mr Muni venkataswamy, our estate officer and represented their problems. I vetoed their request and said that I couldn't dilute the condition- requirement of experience in building 11kv stations. So they were not issued the tender documents.
Prof MN Srinivasan became the chief of admin, but the approvals came from the director. Later MNS was involved in a few decisions. He supported me completely.
We scrutinised the vendors who applied. We had only three eligible vendors. We opened the financials and found Bombay suburban electric company, a reputed company running half Bombay's electrical distribution systems. 
Again I met Prof Rao on the way back to my house on the road and told him about Bombay suburban. He said ok, and gave a go ahead signal. Since he was leaving the next day, I took all the relevant papers, told our FC. He signed the document. Immediately, the registrar signed it. I took it to Prof Rao and got his written approval- all done within half an hour. The purchase order was issued the next day. It was fast work without delays- all done in a day.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
25/03/26, 4:32 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  1025
The above narration of starting a project gives us many learnings:
1. There will be many hurdles, the biggest being human ego related issues. 
2. We need to establish a need for the project, get it accepted by the top management and concerned people in the organization. This was tough for me in core banking applications.
3.All relevant people won't be on the same page. We saw some examples, and will see more. Convince them.
4. Establish working rules, principles, practices and work culture. Make them transparent. Train involved persons. Involve users from the project stage onwards. It has been shown that transformation projects fail due to poor people policies and understanding. Remember every project has a culture, may be different from the organization. That is why we go for outsourcing. I couldn't implement the 66kv project internally. I couldn't use our technicians to even operate the system once completed. The work culture and ethics were poor. So I outsourced operations. It is continuing even now.
5.. Every step needs contemplation, discussions, reviews.
6.Every step involves many decisions. It was based on not only technicalities but also acceptance by the people. Most may not have data.So heuristics plays a big role. 
7. Project planning and execution are dependent on anticipations - performance of components, skills of workers, competence of vendors, subcontracting, payments and financial problems, approvals, market problems, cost escalations etc. So futuristic thinking is essential. Guess the trends and dynamics. It is micro level trend estimation that is important. I should know Bangalore's growth to decide on 66kv.
8. Project has lots of components and steps. Each needs different thinking. A step may involve technical aspects, HR problems,time management, human psychology, finance issues, regulations,taxes,and harmony. This is what Charlie Mungar called Lattice theory- multidimensional and multidisciplinary as well as multiple options based thinking and acting. He also looks at failure analysis as an important characteristics of problem thinking. He also emphasizes looking at alternate paths and solutions.
9. Implementation is outsourced to an agency. We can not sit and wait for completion. We need many check points - to review progress, to give approvals, to select and inspect components, to inspect testing, to inspect constructions, to resolve differences, to clear misunderstandings, to motivate the teams, to use escalation levels properly etc. As the involved party, we should be there everyday both physically and mentally.
10.  Project management is a conscious activity- not a routine one. It contains surprises, uncertainties, many unknowns,market situations etc. It wants hundreds of decisions. So constant, deep and conscious multidimensional thinking is a must. It is a highly cerebral activity. Each project has some uniqueness, some differences, different cultures, some new situations. We need to address this. I encountered these when I handled core banking projects for many banks.
11. People involvement is a critical factor in project management. Involve the top management in decisions and bind them. Keep them aware of the progress. Give realistic assessments.
12. Know your vendors. Agency may be reputed but the operating team may be at lesser level of competencies. Leadership may be inefficient. Time management may be poor. Work discipline may not exist. Egos may be high. Conflicts may occur if the leader is not strong. I have handled these kinds of problems in many projects. This was my biggest headache in several projects.
We will continue in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
25/03/26, 6:59 pm - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Read “History and learnings of Application software and IT developments in India during the period 1985…“ by d k Subramanian on Medium: https://medium.com/@dksubra/history-and-learnings-of-application-software-and-it-developments-in-india-during-the-period-1985-e08ff34393c0
26/03/26, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1026
Let me continue with our new 66kv  power project.After we issued the work order for in campus work to Bombay suburban, we issued another tender for the 66kv underground cable to connect from KEB to the IISc boundary. This was decided as a separate tender. We got responses from Gloster, Siemens , Birla and a fourth cable company Premier. It gave us a surprise. We qualified all four. I had purchased cables from Birla and Siemens and Gloster was a well known manufacturer of HV cables. Premier cables located in Kochi was a surprise. While others quoted around a crore for our work, Premier quoted 50 lakhs rupees- half of others. So I was uncomfortable. We couldn't reject the company as the cost was attractive. We decided to investigate. A big team - Prof MNS, Prof Nagabhushana of our High voltage engineering department, our estate officer , Mr Thimme Gowda and I went to Kochi to inspect the plant. 
We met Mr Parthasarathy,the MD of the company. He was from railways and was the first director of karnataka computer centre.I knew him before. After seeing the operations, we decided to give the contract to them. I was having some misgivings and expressed it to MNS. I said the operations are done in blind and we didn't know the density of the cable in the entire length. But others accepted the quality and I was over ruled. I also ensured that they can draw a 1.1 km long cable. They needed a special cable holder for that. So we gave them the order.
In between I encountered another problem. Prof Chandrasekariah from our HV department met me and told me that we should go for 11kv supply from that substation instead of the 66kv supply. Here is a dilemma- cost vs future proofing. I told him that I wanted reliable and trouble free supply for the next 20 years. I wanted a long term plan and not expensive,but feasible. I left it at that. He didn't stop there. He talked Mr BG Rudrappa, the then chairman of KEB. I knew Rudrappa well, but didn't talk to him. Mr Rudrappa met Prof Rao and told him to go for 11kv and also told him that 11kv was more than enough to meet the institutes power demands.
So Prof Rao as usual saw me walking to the department in the morning and told me the discussions with the KEB chairman. I simply asked him - do you want IISc to be one amongst 10000 customers of KEB or one in ten. That convinced him. He said go ahead. So I crossed that hurdle also.
Taking that decision has stood the test of time. That station is still serving the Institute with robust power supply with fewer interruptions.
I didn't think my job over with work orders issued. I was onto details of orders of components. I also inspected all components at the manufacturing and assembly sites. That meant a lot of travels. I went to Bombay a number of times- transformers, panels, etc, Nasik for switch gear, Chennai for load break switches - that was krishnamachari Srikant's factory- , kochi for 66kv cable, Sanchi for 11kv cables etc. 
I had a problem with the transformer test at Cromptons- Mr Nagarkatti, our works manager at Easun was the works manager here and Ananthasubramanian,who joined Easun with me was in their designs group. I wasn't happy and we signed the test certificate with conditions - that was useful in the next year.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
27/03/26, 4:22 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Happy sri rama navami. 
Post 1027
We completed the project within a one and half years and got it inaugurated by CNR. It was smooth and the system operations was outsourced to Bombay suburban. That was my firm decision.
Just a year after operations, the transformer failed. We didn't have a backup system. So I initiated the repair at Cromptons in Bombay. They wanted payments. I told the VP that is was within warrantee period, the fault was an interturn fault, a manufacturing defect and we had put a query in the test report. He agreed to repair it fast and free. 
Mr K C Reddy joined as an advisor to the estate office. He decided to send Mr Thimme Gowda back to KEB. The new registrar asked me about it. I said that I wasn't involved in that decision. But it was done and couldn't be changed. We were without a good electrical engineer. Fortunately BSES was managing the substation. But there was another big mishap that happened in this period after the transformer failure.
BSES engineer decided to do maintenance work on a pole near  A and B blocks of our staff housing colony near the ECE department. Line clear was not done properly and two workers were electrocuted. I visited the site. It brought bad publicity for us. We had to make BSES pay proper compensation to the families. We put the money in FD and gave the FDs to the wives of both persons. It was an avoidable mistake, a big operational blunder.
So BSES decided to leave our work and they left after a year and we got Mr Kumar to operate the system.This model is working well now also, not only in IISc but also in some other institutions.
This major project planning and implementation experience helped me in designing the substation at sri Jayadeva Institute of Cardiology in the late nineties when their new campus was coming up. I also did another set of projects for karnataka PWD, strengthening the power supply for Vidhana Soudha and Vikas Soudha in the early 2000. I also completely redesigned a cluster based power system for JN Centre for advanced scientific research in 2000.
Let me look at my other major foray into computer science education. Slowly, one by one, engineering colleges were starting computer science programs, but without qualified CS faculty. I decided to help several colleges. I started teaching in Nitte and BDTCE Davangere. Prof Bhandary was the principal of BDT and he requested me to give a course to his students on data structures. Similarly, I taught two courses in Nitte and became a good friend of Prof Sridhar Hegde, principal and Radhakrishnan , HoD.I used to stay in Karkala and give lectures. I maintained my contacts with Nitte for a long time.
While I was lecturing in Nitte in the afternoon after lunch and a visit to Gomateswara, climbing about 300 steps, I felt chest pain. So after returning to Bangalore, I got a treadmill test done by Dr Ramesh, cardiologist. It showed positive signs of blocks in coronary arteries. So I was suggested to get an angiogram done. It could be done only in Bombay then. 
So we went to Bombay leaving the children alone in Bangalore and met Dr Nair. He wanted the angio to be done the next day. We stayed in BSES guest house. The angio was done in the national hospital and it showed a block of 60% in the right ventricular artery, not a dangerous situation. Dr Nair gave me a prescription of medicines and aspirin. I have been continuing those till now.
I returned back, the expenditure was heavy and the institute didn't reimburse my expenses.
In 1986, I was invited to teach computer courses to IIM Bangalore PG diploma students. It was a new experience. I taught in IIM for four years. Prof Kaujalgi helped me on admin issues. I found travel difficult and so stopped teaching after four years. So my taking computer science across the state started well.
Greetings. Dks
28/03/26, 3:57 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post    1028
Let me discuss one aspect of the project that strengthened my learning skills.The question that confronted me - do I know the complete reality of the project? My answer is no. I crossed the bridges when I came to them.
We learn to get a correct reality of a problem. We should know how to learn. Why we learn is to obtain a big picture of reality. What we learn is reality. Let us see how.
One great thing that I learnt as a child was about learning. Most people believe that you learn everything from books alone. That will give you bookish knowledge, not even partial understanding. You need to analyze what you read, find errors, ask questions like a child and write down what you learnt. Can we write down after reading a book on thermodynamics, what is thermodynamics? Can we become a teacher- as Feynman said- and explain thermodynamics to a child? Have we seen thermodynamics in operation? Do we know the context?
But many strongly believe that you get correct knowledge from books. My friend, Mr Jayakumar Anagol had strong beliefs or trust on books. Once I told him that   when cow dung is digested through a biogas plant, it gives three times more Nitrogen than open composted manure and he refused to believe me. I was giving him facts obtained from ASTRAs experiments. He said, 'show me a book with that information'. After a few days, I found it in a book and showed it to him. He accepted my statement.
He is better than many. He contemplated on what he read- he was reading regularly many books. So he understood better and retained a lot of information and he recalled them regularly. 
But most people don't retain what they read. Most students and faculty pick up terms from their reading - they know the term thermodynamics or electrons and can't describe them to a child. Their perceptions are poor.
I realised that reading a book is one small step in our learning process. It may create illusions. Reading itself is not properly done. I believe
Reading involves thinking;
Reading involves pauses;
Reading involves contemplation;
Reading involves preparation?
Reading involves questioning? Why am I reading this? How does this topic fit with the subject?what is its role, impact?where can I apply it? What are the advantages, disadvantages, impacts, errors in the description?
Reading implies explaining.
Reading leads to supplementary reading, discussions, listening to teachers, analysing, thinking, experimenting, looking for practical situations, looking for anecdotes etc. It is a serious business.
But understanding is multidimensional- book knowledge, crowd understandings, experiences, data collection, detective work, changing assumptions, models etc.
Understanding is a continuous process.
In this 66kv project, I didn't anticipate many things- opposition to the 66kv project; half the cost of 66kv cable, Cromptons reluctance in testing the transformer,some contractors' behaviors, several mindsets, great support from KEB and Institute, my heart problem etc.
We should expect unexpected and take the challenges head on. I have experienced many such incidents in many projects handled by me. We don't have full knowledge. We go on a discovery trip during the implementation. That was a big learning- flexible,open and alert mind, preparedness, cooperative spirit, team discussions etc.
Greetings. Dks
29/03/26, 4:17 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1029
TRUTH is the base that bears the earth; by Sūrya are the heavens sustained.
By Law the Ādityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in heaven.
 By Soma are the Ādityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth.
Rig Veda 10.85
To continue on yesterdays post on learning:
1.one of the purposes of learning is  to create a correct and complete- to the extent possible- of the overall reality of the problem or situation or concept you are looking at. Learning takes us from simple understanding to analysis to applications to innovations. It kindles our curiosity.
What is reality? It describes a problem or a concept or a theory completely and correctly. It is a localised reality , not universal.
Let me illustrate the building up of a reality based on our 66kv project:
Starting point: details about our existing power supply and distribution system in detail. This was got through technical knowledge and field study.
Discover the problem: frequent interruptions. It was due to over loading of KEB supply. 11kv quality was poor. This was got through experiences and events.
Solution - look at what is available.
Discovery - 66kv feeder available at dollar colony close to the institute. Start work on getting 66kv feeder to IISc. This was based on discussions.
Solution- build a new substation and connecting lines and cables. Design the supply system form KEB to the new substation. This was a pure technical activity.
What next- get approvals. Prepare plan get cost estimates using an outsourced agency. Get budget approval. Prepare tender document. Discover vendors, technologies, components etc. Build ring fencing.Select vendor. Get approval. Start work. All these are based on information, discussions, data, rules and procedures and activities.
We build reality step by step here. This can be enlarged running into hundreds of pages.
2. Learning needs an open and flexible mind.
3. Learning involves thinking, curiosity,contemplation, questioning, analytical mind, precision and assimilation of knowledge. Learning should lead to wisdom, not just a clerk or manager or worker of a small world like a typist or accountant.
4.Learning is a multi track activity, not a single track. Class room lectures or reading books alone will not give you a picture of completeness of the aspect you are learning. Books will not help us to apply the theory easily. You need to blend theory, availability, practicality, capability , human behaviour, resources, and real life happenings to get a solution, not just analytical intelligence alone. We mix reading, listening, observing, practical experiences, real life data, human behaviors, modeling, analysis, assessing, judging and arriving at/ deducing decisions.Learning is said to make an unknown into a known one.
5. Don't go for assumptions, simplifications and unified theories like one size fits all always. It provides an artificial reality- a maya. These concepts are useful in some situations. Examples are Newton's laws, Maxwell's equations etc. But they don't give a clarity of understanding sometimes. Maxwell's equations couldn't predict ferro resonance. 
Greetings. Dks
30/03/26, 3:54 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1030
HS Nagaraja comments:
Good morning sir. One of your statements in today's post "Most people don't retain what they read" , I agree as I am one among them.
My response
That statement was written in deep anguish, not a casual one. I expect teachers to know the subject and teach it to students. I expect teachers to have more knowledge than students. I saw in close proximity the devotion, sincerity and hard work with a phenomenal mental effort in my uncle, a teacher in my childhood. My family had many teachers and scholars and respected knowledge and instilled it to others freely without any expectations. I had seen my father consoling people throughout his life many people in distress by quoting the appropriate slokas and verses from Ramayana. I saw many going back happy. He didn't do it for money. It was a human duty for him.These impressed me and built an altruistic tendency to teach and transfer knowledge to whosoever wants it. I believed in the Rig vedic dictum, ' knowledge is free.'
I have seen many great teachers with indepth knowledge and understanding in my primary school and high school days. In my engineering college days, I can name only one- Prof Ramaswamy who had an intense desire to learn new things like radio and teach it to students even though it wasn't in the syllabus. I have seen several great teachers in IISc, Bangalore university, and engineering colleges. Some names from some engineering colleges are - Prof MNC, KREC,Prof KA Krishnamurthy, MCE,Hassan, Prof Ramapriyan, NIE,Mysore. That made me happy.
There are many great teachers I saw and listened to in IISc like Prof C Devanathan, Prof.AR Vasudeva murthy, Prof HNR, Prof VSV, Prof R Narasimha, Dr MD Srinath etc. What I admired in most faculty are their depth of knowledge, deep thinking, their scholarship, their way of organizing their lectures, their delivery, their experimentation and research capabilities. A lecture by these was worth listening to.I cherish my association with them.
But I had seen many in IISc itself who used to look and read from their notes in the class without explanations and even without feeling. I doubted whether they knew what they were teaching. One professor used to teach klystron in every course he taught whether it is digital or space communications. Another dictated notes in the class.
Let me look at one incident.Students complained to me about one faculty who was assigned to teach the data structures course. He was talking about supercomputers and didn't teach them data structures at all and ten lectures were over. I had to call him and tell him to follow the course outline and not what he wanted to talk about.
One of our common friends used to talk politics in the class - he was teaching automata and talked about GDP during the entire lecture, not an occasional aside and that too in a short term course to teachers. Once, his students protested and walked out of his exam.He used to confuse the students.That pained me.
 But the magnitude of cut and paste that was used by the teachers in most colleges destroyed me. I saw a total disinterest there in teaching.You come to a profession or job. Should you not be sincere to that job? I saw this disease everywhere and felt devastated. Prof V Krishnan once told me In the mid seventies,'Indians are good teachers by tradition. But that is no longer true.' How do we get that back is my worry. 
Gurukulas taught in depth and teaching was highly devoted with attention to each student. Each village had several gurus and several gurukulas, not just one school. UV Swaminathaiyer in his autobiography said that he learnt from several gurus in different places, several subjects like music, Sanskrit classics and Tamil classics. How do we bring that culture? We are happy that we destroyed that culture and we genuinely feel that is progress. Even VS Naipaul accepted that theory of progress.
Feynman blames text books for this state. He said that text books teach us just words, not knowledge. His examples, given from real school text books are
1.What makes a dog move? 
Answer    energy. 
Do you comprehend that as a child?
2.The second question was: why shoes become worn out with use? 
The answer - friction. 
Do you understand? A better answer would be - explain the process.
The earth is rough. The shoes scratch in the earth. The force pulls small pieces of leather away. So the shoes become worn out. 
Since we pick up only terms and jargon and not real understanding, we don't learn in our schools and we lose retention power. 
I will conclude with a shocking episode. 
I spent a week and interviewed about 160 assistant professors in an engineering college. One question that I asked each was- what general book did you read last year? The answer was none. Reading habit is dead for many. 
Another question was - why do you teach the subject that you are handling?
I got mostly stupid answers. Most couldn't explain why. Many said that the subject is important. Why don't we train them to think?
Those who read and retain knowledge move up the success ladder.
That is the reason I wrote the last post.
Thanks Nagaraja for making me open up.
Greetings. Dks
31/03/26, 4:18 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1031
What are the steps to get a first level of understanding of a concept?
You start with an Intuitive level, then move to a basic level, and then to an analytical level- questioning level and then to a deeper level. Don't look at it as a specialist.
1. Create a habit of reading. Create interest in the book you read.Create a conducive atmosphere. Clear your mind. Build a feeling of concentration- yoga and meditation help here. Then read or listen.Attention is crucial to understanding. Without attention, one doesn't learn anything. Mind should absorb the text and develop a mental picture. That is the preliminary step of learning.Gurukulas used to teach it. My teachers in my childhood used to say-,"don't look anywhere- in Tamil they used a phrase parakku for wandering mind- listen carefully " to anyone who was looking elsewhere. Attention leads to concentration and focus.
2. After reading a para or page, pause. Start thinking.
Ask-What I read is relevant, correct, useful or biased or trash?
Ask yourself what did I read- which area? What does it mean? Does it agree with the usual theories? What is its advantage,impact or applications.
Ask- what is it trying to convey? Can I explain or write an abstract of my learning. Abstraction is a key skill needed for a learner or researcher.
3. Ask is this correct. Visualise. Find analogies.Start building a big mental picture. 
4. You don't retain verbatim what you read, but the essence of the page or chapter say 2% retention. Go outside and experience it if possible.
Learning gives us knowledge.
Let us see the learning methods:
I.Knowledge gathering through practical experiences like visits and observations Know and describe facilities - post offices, taluk offices, banks, school , 
Know and describe supplies - water, energy, milk, food grains, vegetables etc
Know and describe activities like harvesting, cattle grazing , travel etc
Know and describe  personal tasks and activities. 
Identify problems and solutions at a later time. 
Describe your house
II. Observational learning See how elders work, discuss problems - normal like getting a registration in a sub registrar's office done , the processes involved, why village panchayat exists, what the shops are doing, how post offices work , why and how money transactions are done etcSee how functions are conductedSee how houses are constructed See what all can be sent by post, by parcel how. Why do you register a property in sub registrars office Observe negotiations on prices , property distributions.
 III. Situational learning - emergencies
Power supply fails,No milk supply , No water supply ,Heavy rains and flooding , Being stranded alone in the early night , Thefts, Legal aspects
 IV. Learning planning
 -Prepare plans for conducting Deepavali, birthday party, marriages, temple festivals V. Process learning
 Festivals - what are things done why Functions like marriages, ram navami, etc
School day
 VI. Learning from books
 Summarise what you learn. Ask questions, get answers ,Write critiques VII. Discussions with friends - cricket matches, cinemas, VIII thinking Decide where should one go for vacation, what to see, why Decide what to cultivate , when ,why, how.Decide what to buy , why , Decide on how to eat, what to eat, why to eat , what options are available, costs, affordability etc.
The more difficult question is what to learn.
Greetings. Dks
01/04/26, 3:53 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1032
Let me get back to IISc and continue with my academics.
I spent more of my time on outside ,but I made substantial contributions to IISc. I introduced many new courses. 
One of my major contribution was changing the name of the school of automation into department of computer science and automation - CSA. I attended the institute level meeting and argued the reasons for the change. It was accepted. IISc decided yo wind up the BE program and instead start a 4 year integrated ME program. I also chaired a committee to prepare the curriculum for this new four year program.
Due to my involvement with CES, I visited Sirsi often. We got involved in planning the building and recruiting many staff for CES. I attended a one-week workshop in Delhi on environmental management. It was a change to hear many commoners giving their perception of the environment. One night three of us, one of them was a lady, wanted to go for a walk at 930pm. We went for a walk and came back, no incident. But next morning, we were warned that people were watching us. We were told there was a lot of violence in the streets at that time. We were lucky.I also visited Andhra university to discuss the proposal for environmental data management system. We got one project for CES.
 CES started on energy in a big way. We did a survey and data collection in some villages. Later TV Ramachandra did a serious data collection for his PhD. Madhav decided to popularise the newly developed high efficient wood stove named ASTRA ole. Mr Sastry was made responsible for that activity.
Father C J Saldanha moved to CES. He started a state of the environment report. I had solid contributions in that activity for the five years the report was produced.
Let me discuss my family activities.I moved into E7,a ground floor apartment with garage. We had a good garden space in the front. Dr Subba Rao stayed on the first floor-E8. I got them bicycles to go to school. I got them swimming pool passes so that they could go swimming regularly. They also saw movies in Gymkhana and I took them for a few movies. My children got settled well here, taking care of school activities, and playing with friends. They became independent. They got independent rooms.They used to go to the faculty club to borrow books. So I was very happy their reading habits became strong. I bought lots of books- Russian books, Amar Chitra katha, and story books. My son became meek by this time, bullied by his friends.
The children were taken by us to several places- Madras,Mysore, Bandipur, Sirsi, Kumta, Mercara,Hubli, Ungra village, Hassan, Belur, Shravana belegola, Kemmanagundi, Jog falls, Bombay, Pune,Kolkata, and later to Madurai,Delhi, Simla, and many other places. So they had a good exposure of the country. I took my son to Davanegere to BIET when I went for KSCST inspection for students projects. Prof Vrushabendrappa offered a seat in his college for my son when he would have completed 12th.
Our social life improved with many neighbors becoming friendly.All of us built a lot of friendships. So we had a peaceful and contented family life.It was really a great and enjoyable life for all of us.
My friendship with Major Somasekhara grew. He helped me a lot with my house construction.He repaired my furniture and made a big sofa set for my house.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
02/04/26, 4:20 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  1033
The period 1986 87 was an exciting period taking me to new paths and territories. 
I started teaching real time systems which became a focus for my research for the next decade plus in Computer science. It included data bases and transactions processing. That was the first the course was offered in India. Mr Jayant, director, AirIndia mentioned about this course at a CSI conference.
I started looking at distributed systems, an evolving area with focus on distributed operating systems , distributed databases and transactions processing. Mr Haldar joined me as a PhD student and worked on distributed transactions processing. 
I started looking at concurrency control at a good depth and we showed that many algorithms in the literature did not maintain mutual exclusion, the main requirement for concurrent processes. We found the concurrency control algorithms in the OS book by Peterson and Silbershaft were wrong. That gave me a big lesson, ' don't accept what is in a book as truth. Analyze it.'
 When I was teaching operating systems from the mid seventies, I concentrated on concurrency. My OS teaching was focusing on algorithms and concurrency handling. I rejected many OS books like Donovan, Tannenbaum,Peterson etc and used the book by Per Brinch Hanson. That book was algorithmic. But it was cryptic. So I sharpened my explanatory skills. I explained every line in the algorithms.I loved the write up on The operating system by Dijkstra, but I couldn't teach it. I also loved the Multics OS book. I included my learnings from Manchester to make my course richer. I also followed a book which gave algorithms to build a complete OS. 
I had one constant thinking- how do I improve my understanding and how do I teach better. This made me look at literature- manuals,books, articles and papers in depth to understand many nuances of OS. I did this with my course on systems programming. I moved away from Donovan's IBM focused book to PDP/11 manuals and Ullmann's book on programming systems, one of his early books. I continued this urge with my course on databases.
I taught the OS course in the evening program of Proficience. I taught every year in Proficience. My course at IIM Bangalore gave me a different exposure to the response and different kinds of thinking of management students - students asked me questions. My lectures and teaching at several engineering colleges to average students exposed me to another human angle- a struggle to keep up with me and understand. Most students took keen interest in my lectures. My lectures at PSTI were again a new experience. I had varied experiences in teaching programming in datamatics. Similarly my lectures at Proficience exposed me to professionals ,totally different from IISc students. They were interested in practices and applications and not theory. They wanted me to clarify their doubts not even related to what topic I was teaching.
I also taught Unix at MIT Manipal and distributed operating systems at REC Trichy. Both were taught for the first time in India.
My travels for teaching increased to many engineering colleges in the state- MCE Hassan, GIT, Belegaum, Andhra university,TCE,Madurai, SV University, Tirupathi and others. I also gave lectures on computers and energy to school students. I continued to give lectures on environment at NSS camps. I assisted Mr Sankarasubramsnian in several ways including visiting villages and explaining to elders there.
More in the next. 
Greetings. Dks
03/04/26, 4:09 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1034
This period was also a very productive period. Let me look at a few projects that I was involved in. 
The first one was a joint project with Dr N S Somasekhara and KN Krishnaswamy of our management department in 1984 85. We were looking at solving some problems of electricity and transport in our city. I did a study to minimize the dead mileage for BTS buses. I came up with a simple idea of circle based allocation of buses to depots. I wrote a paper on this and submitted to IFIP conference.
The second one is not a single one, but a sequence of activities on energy. Till now, I was looking at energy at supply end and modeling of energy systems.Now, I shifted my focus of research to the use of energy in reality. I first chose to study the efficiency of energy use in Industries first. I asked TV  Ramachandra, who was working with me in CES, to collect data from 40 industries in Karnataka in order to study the efficiency of use. This was a major activity. He physically visited the industries, measured energy consumption and collected data available with the industry on energy consumption and production. It was a lot of laborious work and Ramachandra did it meticulously. We used energy used per rupee of production. This helped us to compare industries of similar kind like sugar, paper, spinning, oxygen etc. We compared it with international norms. The results created surprises for many people. They didn't believe it. Then we continued with small industries and only rice mills. We found small industries fail due to high energy consumption and high ratios of costs per rupee of production going to energy purchases.
The third one was the study of urban water distribution system for Bangalore, a KSCST project. Dr Satyanarayana collected data from the head office and service stations. That had a lot of gaps and didn't reveal the full picture. He left after a year. I took my BMSCE students Ashok Kumar Kattimani and Ramakrishna- I had four students in that batch who did their BE project with me and I recruited Ramachandra for CES and these two were also from that group. - to work on the project. They worked for about three years and did a marvelous job. 
First, they helped me to clean up the data on consumption. I decided to study consumptions by public fountains as the BWSSB figures were guesses. They experimented and measured water flow in a sampled set of public fountains. That gave us a good estimate. 
Then, we wanted to establish the number of lakes in the city. They visited each listed lake and came back with a shocking figures that out of 150 lakes, only 25 existed at that time and their water spread area had come down drastically. Encroachment was a problem going on for hundred years in Bangalore.
Then they did a number of case studies- 1.Bangalore dairy and its water consumption for cleaning bottles and the floor and machines. We got an estimate of 8 litres of water consumed per litre of milk output;
2. We wanted to estimate the water usage for car washing and the two member team measured water used for each car. They did this in several garages. Based on their study, we estimated the water consumed for car washing in the city.
3. The team did measurements of water use by several industries and that gave us dis aggregated data.
Unfortunately there was no data available on the quantity of water lost due to leakages in pipes. Our estimates showed that the losses may be around 30%.
We estimated the rain water quantity and it would meet about 30% of our consumption. 
Since a lot of water used was for cleaning purposes, we suggested water treatment and supplying to industries. That would reduce consumption by half.
We produced a big report, but none of the recommendations was considered for implementation.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
04/04/26, 5:02 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1035 
Kindly recall my involvement with TAP,Karnataka government's path breaking decision on standardizing and advising on computer usage, architecture and selection of computers and software. This panel had difficulties in the first two years of operations - the director playing games and the secretaries non understanding as well as the members non aggressive attitude. The director came up with a proposal favoring a particular specs and a vendor. I opposed it strongly. Dr Srikantan suggested getting the programs converted by TCS and Rajaraman agreeing to the proposal. It was approved. Later the director, a Deputee from Indian Navy, faced a lot of operational issues.  One problem I remember- He rushed to my office one day and told me that a power cable in the computer centre was cut by rats. I went and saw that and told him to get it jointed quickly. He didn't get any support from his officers. So PJ Nayak took another decision. He sent him back to Navy and appointed a young IPS officer as director. That change helped in streamlining the organization. The TAP became involved in its functions. They set up a subcommittee and I became the chair of this subcommittee. The director was its convener and the additional secretary, planning, another member. So the single point decision making became operational and effective.
This involvement of mine became very deep with time. This gave me an excellent opportunity to know the problems and accelerators for the absorption of technologies by society. I got into the driver seat. There were several concerns staying with me for more than two decades.
1. Most electricity boards refused to accept computer based planning and control despite a lot of fast paced developments in the world. I found the culture and comfort zones are stronger than computer algorithms despite their advantages. I found the starting torque required to be very high. It should first simplify the absorption process and then we need facilitators for absorption.
2. Let me look at my involvement in popularizing bio gas plants and solar devices. Prof Vinod Vyasulu also questioned on this.
AKN tried very hard to push bio gas for cooking and put in enormous effort to push it amongst the villagers of Pura. It didn't succeed. We didn't have enough sustained facilitators. Our facilitators got tired and left that task. Once a technology is used by people, they need a support structure. It was missing here.
But ASTRA ole picked up because KSCST employed district level engineers for hand holding and trouble shooting. Also KSCST conducted training programs for more than a decade building local capability to build the stove. Thirdly, usage was similar to the old stoves. So no new learning was required. 
But the same was not true of solar cookers. Despite my effort in getting KIMCO to manufacture it and providing subsidies, solar cooking was not accepted by people. It was a deep cultural issue and also an availability issue.
3. I saw that computer usage was reasonable in research during the seventies and eighties, but computer applications failed in governments, public organizations, banks, industries etc. Commercial applications were complex, not standardised and led to errors. So even though many tried to use computers for several years, they failed. Outsourcing was a good route, but it had problems of trust, competence, sincerity and proper understanding. So computerization didn't work even for computer companies. Computer purchase was a hazardous job till PCs arrived in large numbers in the market at lower and affordable prices. We need multiple sustained actions in many directions to support the absorption of computers by organizations. This was an appropriate time.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
05/04/26, 5:03 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1036
https://medium.com/@dksubra/the-implications-behind-learning-and-understanding-and-the-mechanisms-needed-prof-d-k-subramanian-fab36cf9d2ab
I realised the following facts about technology absorption.
1. AKN and all renewable energy people had a mistaken belief. If a technology is good technically, then you can force people to accept it. They thought it to be a push process. But unfortunately we forgot to understand that people are the decision makers, not the goodness of a technology only. It is a pull process.
2. Technology absorption is not a simple process in most cases. It is a complex multidimensional process. 
While technology absorption failed with renewable devices, I was confident that it will succeed definitely and will become the prime engine. Why did I feel that computerization will lead our development and economy and be a great success? There are many reasons:
1. It is not an idealistic push process, but a strong pull process supported by push.
2. It had benefits of several orders of magnitude over existing manual processes. It reduced errors, took decisions faster, dealt with large volumes of data, could do many new functions like alert, data acquisition,control, access, printing, etc. It increased productivity. It helped the top managements. 
3. I already showed its efficacy in several places including the gadag APMC.
4. Manpower was available in large numbers to build software and operate systems 
5. Manufacturers improved the processes.
6. It adapted innovation, alternate approaches easily. It allowed structural changes.
7. It gave power to people and users. Intermediaries were eliminated.
But you should know how to handle the hurdles.
So I came to the conclusion that 
1.the process is riddled with a lot of mistaken beliefs and understandings. Those lead to failures. Educating, advising, hand holding and correcting beliefs are essential to absorb computers in an organization. Enthusiasm is not enough.
2. The supplier side is also riddled with mistaken beliefs and grandiose potentials. I saw several vendors proclaiming that they have found universal solutions for an unsolved problem. That was for security issues. You see the ignorance.
3. There are cultural, organizational, procedural and behavioral issues with computerization. Where ever they are addressed carefully, the computerization activity was successful. 
1985 to 90 was the learning era. We learnt the problems due to computerization in different government departments.
After 1990, most computerization activities of the government were great successes. PCs were available at affordable prices and in large numbers. Many programmers were found in many departments. PCs were used for document preparation and accounting primarily. Servers used COBOL programs.Many departments and organizations like KSRTC, MPM, land army, had computer centres.
Some successes are:
Commercial taxes computerization
CET cell and engineering admission counseling
Mahithisindhu program
Karnataka secondary exam evaluation computerization
Bangalore one, later Sakala
Cauvery software for registration
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
06/04/26, 4:40 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post   1037
https://medium.com/@dksubra/my-experiments-with-computerization-of-karnataka-government-departments-units-and-organizations-77e4690c598e

Let me discuss my changed approach to handle the computerization work in the Karnataka government.
My axiom was , ' don't go with prefixed ideas or past knowledge when looking at a new problem'.
You might have developed a process and found some ideas helpful in a case, but you may not succeed in another case by blindly following that process. 
Each case may have some nuances, some differences, some new behaviors of people, some new situations. So we need to adapt to those variations with an open mind. 
So the most important step is to build the context for each case. Then build a new process. Be prepared to change the process midway.
But don't change certain important principles. Principles should be evolved over a period of time and they should be applied uniformly. That gives credibility to your process. 
Some important principles are- communicate, be transparent, maintain fairness and integrity, discuss and convince, listen to them, know their problems and limitations, and uniform yard sticks.
Another axiom that I followed was, don't distrust all in an organization.I firmly believe that every organization and every government office has a few people who work sincerely- in fact the success of that office depends on them as they are honest, sincere and believe in their job. They may be god fearing and duty conscious. I have seen this many offices. Also, there are some thinking officers in each office who want to improve the procedures. I found most IAS, IPS and KAS officers to be smart, sincere and keen on improvements. I built my process based on them.
So I started on people-focused processes, not just only on solutions. I focused on a totally new area- interactions with people, spending 1000s of hours on this and making it a major task and negotiations with vendors. I needed different skillsets for these two tasks of interaction and negotiation. I started on that journey. 
The first step - the director KGCC should be on board. If he or she is not convinced, it is difficult to move forward. Most directors were either IAS officers like Vijayakumar and Ramana Reddy or  IPS officers like Sharat Saxena and MN Reddy. The only exception was Mr Shantappa. He couldn't handle the job.I had phenomenal rapport with all except one. All believed me and tried to understand my arguments. Similarly the additional secretaries from planning also were helpful.I had several IAS officers there. 
Second- the chairs of TAP were all good, helpful and cooperative. They wanted to promote IT.
Third- The difficult step was buyer education. It is the toughest job. Human ego, beliefs, commitments, permanence in that job etc mattered. Where there was synergy, interest and commitment, we had success. Commercial tax computerization was a great example of this. 
Fourth- The next people problem was vendors. This was not easy. Fortunately, I found many who were committed and true to their words. They realized that we were giving them opportunities and accepted it. But a few were bad.
Then I moved to purchase procedures. This was a tricky situation.
My proposition was that the TAP approves the configurations, numbers and software etc and the concerned departments buy the computers and other associated devices and packages. I didn't want a centralized purchases, as that would lead to delays and corruption. 
But leaving purchases to individual departments led to many problems. The departments didn't have expertise in computer purchases- who are good vendors, what is a correct price, etc. The usual three quotation process was myopic and led to considerable differences in the prices of same type of computers purchased by different departments. This led us to think and find solutions.
1.So I concentrated on standardizing computer specifications.
2. We centralized negotiations by our subcommittee to short list reliable manufacturers - we rejected assemblers- and to get their prices. We publicized these to all departments.
3. We moved into a rate contract mode. We started following a two part system. We were the first to start rate contract and two part tendering. This simplified purchases by all departments.
Let me look at my activities with KSCST. I started advising KSCST on computer purchases. DR Ramesh was handling the computer purchases and he took my advice and my approval seriously. I even helped DST to buy servers at a low cost. The cost in Delhi was three times the cost in Bangalore. So that reflects the effectiveness of our system. It was not followed by any other state or city. Lateron , many used the rate contract system.
Greetings. Dks
07/04/26, 3:58 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1038
I am still in 1985 86 period.By this time , I decided to buy a car. I started learning to drive from Mani motors. After about two months of driving practice, I appeared for the test and got a driving license. Then I started on my car purchase. I looked at options- maruthi 800, dolphin and fiat. I was keen on dolphin by Sipany motors, a local car manufacturer. I even visited their factory. But maintenance was a big problem. Resale value was zero. So I thought of maruthi 800 but it was not available, booking closed. So I booked a maruthi van. But prof SN Rao, my colleague in the department, got a maruthi van and it turned turtle on the highway while driven by his son. Also there were problems with dust and straw collected by the fan. So I bought a Fiat car manufactured by Premier automobiles and named as Premier padmini. It was a good one and booked through Sundaram motors, a TVS company.I gave away my allotment of maruthi van to a friend of Mr Thimme Gowda.
After I bought the car, I drove it home, and unfortunately hit a car. So I felt I had to get more training in driving. We had a driver working in ASTRA by name Kodandapani. I got him to help me learn to drive. I spent the evenings for more than two months to get a good level of driving skill.We used to drive for about 40 to 70 kms to get endurance. I also learnt to drive in crowded areas.He was a great help for me.

I had discontinued my visits to TCS. I became busy with conferences. The biggest was the IFIP international conference on CAD CAM CAE organized by CSI.  It was followed by many conferences of both computer society and the Institution of engineers. 
I became a member of TC7 of IFIP. I submitted a paper to the TC7 conference in Tokyo and also had to attend the TC7 meeting. So I started planning my visit scheduled in the summer of 1986.
Gen Balasubramanian suggested a travel agent, one of the best I had seen till now. He told me that the charges for Tokyo and LA were the same. So he suggested that I should book a ticket up to LA, not just to Tokyo. He said that the best fare that was available was for Thai airways and so wanted me to book by Thai airways and not Singapore airlines.He agreed to all my requests.I said that I wanted to go to Bangkok first, then to Hongkong, then to Tokyo ,then to LA,US, stay for 10days and then to Singapore, to Chennai and Bangalore. Since Thai airways was flying from Kolkata, I had to go to Kolkata from Bangalore and then to take the flight to Bangkok.Bangalore was yet to get direct international connections. We had to struggle for another decade for international travel. We had to go via Mumbai or Delhi or Chennai or Kolkata, no other way possible.The ticket was booked. But I don't know where I would go, where would I stay and what would I do?
Now started my serious task of planning and logistics at each place. My cousin and family lived in Hongkong and so I had no problem there. I wrote to the CS department in AIT,Bangkok and arranged a talk there. Similarly I arranged a talk on rural energy in the rural development department. I got positive responses for my two talks in AIT and so two days were taken care of. My stay and travel to and fro to airport would be taken care of by AIT. 
I wrote to the organizer of the conference and he suggested a hotel for my stay. Now my arrangements at US and Singapore were pending.
I wrote to Prof AV Balakrishnan who was also a member of TC7 and he agreed to fix a lecture at UCLA. I wrote to UC Berkeley and one lecture on rural energy was arranged there. I wrote to Prof Tom Kailath and he said I could visit there for a discussions, but no lecture was possible at that time in the CS department. Then my student CP Ravikumar told me that he got admissions in USC, LA. He said that his supervisor was Raghavendra. He was also my student. So I wrote to CS Raghavendra and he arranged a lecture. He also informed me that another student of mine, Ram Chellappa was also there. So my lectures were fixed. But my stay wasn't fixed and I had no clue where I would be staying in LA for 10 days.
Continued in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
08/04/26, 4:05 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.   1039
I started applying for visas. Fortunately, I had to go to Chennai for all four visas- to Japan and the USA, Thailand and Singapore. My mother and sister were living in Chennai near the US consulate. So it was easy for me. 
I had some difficulty at the Japanese consulate. I didn't have an official letter in a letterhead, but a copy from a telex machine. They didn't believe in me at the entrance of the consulate. Arguments ensued. Finally the Indian clerk at the front office decided to take it to his boss. I showed them my tickets. He went inside, talked to someone and they issued me a tourist visa. 
The Singapore and Thai visas were easy. Then I went to the US consulate. I told them about my lectures at USC, UCB and UCLA. So I got the visa easily. 
Then I got a great relief and surprise and coincidence. Those who don't believe that there is a big conscious force operating on all, would be surprised. As I was about to leave the consulate , I saw a person walking in. It was still an easy time to get into the consulate, almost a walk in, not like now. 
That person introduced himself to me - his name is E Srivatsan. He said he was my student from the biochemistry department, took my math course and got 100 marks from me. He said he was in LA. See my relief. Then I told him that I would be going to LA. He invited me to his house. He said he would pick me from the LA airport and take me to his house. I took his phone number. My worry gone. I got a place to stay. He would take care of me. That was a big relief and I came back happy.
I was leaving in June 1986 and all the preparations were going on. But by march, I had almost everything stitched up- my travel by Thai airways, stay in different places including hotel accommodation in Tokyo, lectures etc. I didn't have enough foreign exchange. I got around 500 dollars from SBI. I had to go to SBI main office and spend a day to get the dollars. I took it as travellor's cheques.
Suddenly, I found Chakrapani one day in the department. He was working at the university of Red lands. It was close to LA. I invited him home for lunch. Dr Mahishi also joined. Chakrapani invited me to his house. He told me he would pick me from Srivatsan's house and dropped me back.
That was the year Gymkhana introduced T shirts. While email was yet to come in and laptops and mobiles were still far away, T shirts made entry by that time. My wife's cousin, Rajan, was going to LA then. He wanted the T shirts. They weren't ready. So I told him that I would bring them when I came to LA.
PPTs hadn't arrived by then. So I prepared my talks on transparencies.I started that from 1978 onwards and had prepared thousands of these sheets containing contents of my talks and lectures. I started using the overhead projector for my talks at conferences. Still OHP was years away from engineering colleges. We started using OHP quite early ,say mid 70s in IISc. Almost every department had a projector. But class rooms weren't fitted with projectors. The reason was the high cost of transparency sheets. Initially, we wrote on a rolling, thin sheet of plastic, erase the written material and reuse it. It wasn't effective. Only by late 80s , It became popular at IISc and IITs. 
We talked about technology absorption. But how many institutions and how many teachers used a slide projector in the 60s and 70s. We used it under our extension lecture program even in the village schools in the late seventies. I had several hundred slides which I used in schools. Even in the institute, only a few used these aids. We had to push its use in colleges during the TEQIP days. Teachers were reluctant to do the extra work. Even PPTs were used much later. I think even today PPT use is minimal in schools and colleges. Why? Even though we know the teaching aids to be effective, our teachers don't use them and stick to the traditional chalk and talk method.
So by May, I was ready to leave for this long trip.
Let us discuss the exciting things that happened during the trip in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
09/04/26, 4:51 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post            1040
Since I had a meeting of the national executive of the Institution of Engineers at Hyderabad just before the start of my long overseas journey, I decided to go from Hyderabad to Kolkata to start my onward journey. 
I met Prof AK Rao in Hyderabad. He was the director of the engineering staff college established by the Institution of Engineers.
I didn't carry a big luggage. I had just two medium sized bags. I was carrying a lot of items for my cousin in Hongkong. I had a few dresses only. I stayed with my uncle in Kolkata. At that time, both national and international airports were in the same building in Kolkata and Chennai unlike Bombay and Delhi.I took the Thai flight to Bangkok. It was a short flight and a comfortable flight. I got Tofu and Thai curry, not Indian food. I liked the food.
On arrival at Bangkok, a driver from AIT picked me and dropped me in their guest house. Everything was smooth.
I had an opportunity to see the campus the next day. It was a nice and clean campus. I met Prof Sadananda and Prof Nanda and another professor from India. I knew Sadananda before when he was with JNU. Prof Nanda was from Roorkee.Prof Phien organized the my lecture. After my talk , I was taken to a restaurant for lunch. It was a shock for me. It was only non-vegetarian food and I could take rice and eat rice without anything. Nobody bothered about me. I ate rice and took beer. 
The next day, I gave a talk to another group on biomass technologies. Prof Desingu Setty had organized my talk. He gave me lunch in the guest house itself and we had veg fried rice and some juice. I left for airport in the evening to go to Hongkong. Along with me a friend of Sadananda from Malaysia also came to the airport. He wanted my opinion on manufacturing cDOT model exchanges. I told him that CDOT exchanges were not popular. He was pushed into entering into an agreement. I told him not to rush into it. He was happy and gave me 1000 ringit for that advice.
So One lap of journey was completed successfully.
Bangkok airport had crowded check in counters at that time. I checked in and got on the flight. I reached Hongkong at 11pm. My cousin's husband Subramanian, working in UCO bank, received me at the airport and took me to his house. 
Next day, I spent with them. We visited the city centre, bought a few things for me including a suitcase. We went for a short boat ride in the ocean. I left for Tokyo the next morning.
Greetings. Dks
10/04/26, 4:49 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1041
 https://medium.com/@dksubra/what-is-a-startup-mindset-2ba3501deaaf
I arrived at Narita airport from Hongkong, not a long flight. It was a great , modern and easy to move around airport, somewhat similar to Paris De Gaulle airport. It was much better designed than Heathrow or Schipol airports. 
One of my co passengers told me that a system exists here and it works.I walked through immigration and customs without any delays, changed dollars to yen, took a train to the city and then metro to the hotel - all in an hour. The room was small, no food items were available there. I got some tea from a vending unit outside the room. Food was the most difficult problem there. Only rice and bread were vegetarian. So I had to survive five days on these plus tea. I accepted that situation. So far everything is going smooth except food.
Next day, I walked to the venue and registered for the conference. I had several TC7 meetings scheduled in addition to my presentation. The transport systems were very good. You could go by metro to various parts of Tokyo. That was faster than taxi services. Traveling was very easy.
I met two Indians - Prof Keshava Rao from the US and Mr Arumugam doing PhD in France. One student working for his PhD in the Tokyo university invited all three of us for dinner in his house. We went to his house, had rice and sambar, a great change. The student's name was Swamy. He joined REC Trichy after completing PhD.
Mr Arumugam joined Madurai university after completing his PhD. I will discuss it later.
Tokyo weather was pleasant. It was raining at regular intervals.We saw lots of people walking and shopping even in midst of rains. They carried an umbrella and left the umbrella outside shops using a plastic cover to close the umbrella so that no water puddles form at the entrance. They were careful and considerate.
One day, I wanted to change dollars to yen. I walked into a branch of a bank. They were embarrassed and mumbled something to me. I didn't understand. They said that I should go to another bank to get dollars. I was unusually persistent and asked them, why? A senior officer came and told me that their system wasn't working and so they were directing me to another branch. I learnt a lot from this experience:
1. They are very polite and helpful unlike our branches.
2. Tech failed there also but they weren't making a big problem of it. They handled it nicely and quietly.
3. All were motivated to serve you and help you.In Indian bank, a clerk will tell you that network is down and so get out. Politeness is rarely known with us.
I loved the total experiences in Japan that I had in every place. The people were polite, disciplined and followed systems meticulously. Let me give another example.
You wanted directions to go to a place. If you ask a person passing by you, he or she will stop, try to understand your request and show you the directions. Some will even write them on a paper and give it to us. They know English, but can't speak fluently. But no one told me "gothilla" rudely. 
We went on a sightseeing tour. The hostess made jokes about their lifestyle. She said Japanese women wear four rings: engagement ring, wedding ring, boring and suffering.
Even today, I meet and see several Japanese here in our apartment complex. They are polite and nice. Their behavior hasn't changed over 60 years. We have changed a lot, become tense, uneasy, worried, and unhappy- a lot of changes I see in us. This is a very characteristic situation with us- say everything was better in the past and changed to the worse now. 
I read it in UV Swaminatha iyer's autobiography titled ' en Charithram' written in the 19th century. He says ,'his village was peaceful and people lived happily during his childhood and it changed a lot when he was 80 years old- that was the time he started writing his autobiography.'
I also feel that my village was a peaceful, happy, and harmonious place during my childhood and has changed into a crowded, tense and uncertain place today.
So everything went off well and smoothly without any problem.
Greetings. Dks
11/04/26, 4:24 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.  1042

Let me continue with my trip from Tokyo to LA.
So after the conference, I left for the airport, by metro,and then by train and lastly by bus. Every body followed the queue cheerfully. It was a new experience- no complaints like our desis.I took a longer flight from Tokyo to LA crossing the Pacific ocean and international dateline. Food was vegetarian, mostly vegan except milk powder given to us for coffee or tea. Even for that, they gave a whitener substitute. I got lots of Tofu, vegetables, fruits, fruit juices and tea.
We reached Seattle first. Then I took a local flight after immigration and customs. The immigration guy was given a computer and was struggling to key in my name. He was cursing the computer. He asked me "what are you doing?" I said , "I work on that wretched computer." He laughed at it. Those days, there were no caged counters for immigration people and they were friendly.
The next flight reached LA via San Jose at 4pm. As soon as I came out of the aircraft into the gate, I saw Srivatsan. I was relieved. I picked up my suitcase and he took me to his house located in the suburb- Burbank.
Both Srivatsan his wife were good and simple people. They followed the Indian traditions sincerely in LA. They were religious.They were great hosts. I had a lot of discussions with him every day. We definitely talked about the institute- faculty, his supervisor, his departmental people who were living in the neighborhood and others. He told me that Prof ES Rajagopal stayed with him. Then we spent a lot of time discussing his research and research in general. He felt that research in India needed a lot of changes. We argued about it. 
 I went to the post office to post the T shirts. It was a good experience of organization. I picked up a paper token and waited for my turn. Then I got a big and thick envelope, put the T shirt in it, sealed it, wrote the address and gave it to the counter person. I paid for envelope and postal charges and it was done. It was a simple task done pleasantly. It was a contrast to my experience in the Italian post office in Trieste. There there counter person was talking to other staff even while serving me, just like India. But both in England and the US, I saw professional approaches in all public offices like banks, post office etc.
I visited USC first on a Saturday. Since a football match was scheduled that day, it took me 40 minutes to travel a mile.
 I met CP Ravikumar first and he took me to meet Raghu. Raghu introduced me to another student of mine, Ram Chellapa, another faculty in the CS department. The EECS department was a big one with thousands of graduate students. I also met Dr Prasanna and Dr Sastry. My lecture was fixed on the next working day. Prasanna invited to his house for dinner. I completed my talk, spent time with others. Then I went out on the road to buy coffee. After buying coffee, I was returning back to the department. Suddenly two people started chasing me. I ran and got into the building before they caught up with me. I was lucky that it happened near the building and I could react fast and get into the building.
More in the next.
Greetings. Dks
12/04/26, 4:59 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post.    1043
A query from Prof Mahendra Babu
It is  a suspense to know who chased  you and why?Thanks👍🙏
Mr Srinivasan ,PNB also raised this query. 
There is no mystery here. USC was located downtown LA. The intention of those chasers was to beat me and take away money from me. It was an attempted mugging incident.  That was the reason, I assume. I didn't check on this afterwards.
Let me discuss my tech exposure in USC.I got two big surprises.One was the modernized communications in the university. I had seen that most universities in the west had a good communications network- land lines and many newsletters. The library would house most reports of the university. So transparency was good. I saw it in University of Manchester. ICTP, Trieste, and later in AIT, Bangkok. But here in USC, I saw that most faculty and students communicated using email. The general emails came later. But they used Unix email feature.All faculty and students had a computer and they were connected to the central server. They used computers for calculations and preparing technical papers. This concept of campus connectivity impressed me. It took more than 15 years for this connected institution concept to percolate into a few Indian institutions connected by ERNET and campus networks. It was initially telephone lines and dialup , poor system. The main hurdle was our slow movement towards building a strong fibre network. We were yet to get dial up modem. That came up only by mid 1990s. We couldn't get dialup connections in most highschools by 2000 and our Mahithisindu program suffered a lot due to not being able to access internet.
Broadband came in small steps only by 2000. Fortunately, the telecom department and BSNL took the high bandwidth copper and optical network interconnecting most cities and towns seriously and implemented it by 2004.
It worries me a lot to think that:
'We ape western development models and technology after a long time gap without thinking and considering their models being to appropriate to India.'
Recall that the US went ahead prioritizing road and air transport, destroying the railways. It invested heavily in highways and freeways and airports. For them, infrastructure meant a huge network of highways and airports. 
We are initially aware of the high costs of highways- they need land and heavy maintenance. So we moved to railways. But, now, we are investing very heavily in building a massive highways network during the past decade and praise Mr Gadkari. But do we realize that highways don't solve the traffic snarls. Also highways island villages along the route. 
I am happy that while we invested heavily in highways and airports, we didn't ignore railways. We have improved travel speed and comfort through many Vande Bharat trains and gone for separate goods transport corridors.Our canal transport network needs more attention, particularly for transporting goods.
But we completely missed the bus and miss it even now- what is that? We never thought that telecom is a bigger and more important infrastructure than roads. Telecom moved beyond voice communication to information and data transfers.Information access is more beneficial than physical movement to cities.We missed the Telecom highway and Radio highway. We didn't modernize them for several decades depending on the old technology of ITI and a small digital exchange of CDOT. Fortunately, the opening of the country in 1991 brought in new players. Our electronics exchanges became modern and reliable and inexpensive. But our network was with BSNL. Even air tel, Tata couldn't do anything to improve the infrastructure. All private companies believed that infrastructure is the government business. Only reliance jio changed that attitude.
Communications was going through a lot of multidimensional changes like computers in the eighties and nineties. The US had high bandwidth networks, digital networks, VSATs and satellite communications , optical fibres, and mobile networks. But our efforts were minimal during this period. Only by 2000, we picked up speed to introduce digital networks, fibre networks, and mobile communications. We started understanding the importance of communications.
More in the next post.
Greetings. Dks
13/04/26, 4:08 am - d k Subramanian Whatsapp: Post 1044
Mrs Nitya Ananthakrishnan talks about USC.
'Good morning. It's interesting to read the anecdote near USC. My son Ravi did his master's and PHD at USC. I had gone to attend his graduation. He was staying in an apartment very close to the university area. He was quite afraid of walking there after dark and used to urge me to walk fast if we were returning after sunset. There were lots of suspicious looking people loitering around.Your post brought back some old memories.Thank you.'
Thanks
Mr Chandra Mohan had a question earlier on the use of computers and slow or low computer adaptation by offices. we will look at his comment in the posts coming up now. 
He has a comment:
'True sir, India needs good railway infrastructure along with highways n airways 🙏'
Thanks.
Mr Bala Ajjampur has more comments
Bala Ajjampur: Sir, regardless of from where the growth in telecommunications came from, optical fibre network  has become a chaotic deployment in Bangalore.  While the purpose is served, the way the infrastructure was allowed to get deployed is big failure on the part of the government,  whether the power to impose regulations resided in state or central.
How can someone normalise these types of infrastructure developments that are totally at the mercy of private enterprises?
My response 
I am an utilization focused researcher, but don't ignore theory, modeling and solutions.
I am always a student trying to learn how technology developed and how it gets used or absorbed. I did it with electricity first, computers afterwards and also environment and energy uses. This trip gave me opportunities to enhance my knowledge of technology and development to a great extent, particularly the pros and cons. I found many similarities and many differences with India vs the US.
 I didn't get much opportunity to observe the tech scene in Tokyo. Yes, they were far ahead- most devices produced here, banks automated, communications great, most commerce used computers. Industries used computers effectively for control and data generation. Utilities were advanced in computer usage. But didn't see much of software work and PC based uses. Terminals were used everywhere. So it was a very good and efficient connected system which we can see, use and experience in Tokyo. I saw a holistic approach in development, manufacture and use, a good aspect we should learn. There were no silo usage patterns, no egos preventing tech absorption. Tech is accepted by all in Japan. Their approach is very different from ours- very planned, thought about, organized and holistic. Ours - unorganized , un planned, chaotic, uneven, egotistic.
Those, mentioned above are the primary reasons for Bangalore's development. While water was with the state government, they did a lot of studies and planned well. Arcavaty followed by Cauvery supplied water to the city. We are comfortable now.
The luck with electricity was - when sharavathy valley project came up in the sixties, there was a large surplus power available. So most- about 600 to 700 MW came to Bangalore through many 220kv lines in the sixties. So SRS was planned for about 30years. So both were planned reasonably well. But the distribution of both were chaotic. Same is true of roads, transport and telecom. 
Bala, you are right. Telecom falls between many stools. State has no role. TRAI , TRI and DoT regulate and delay the development. They live in the old times. Privitazation helped a lot. Our broadband improved considerably with private players. But mobile changed the scene by 2002.Bala , what you say as chaotic is the cable TV lines mostly and less of fibre optic lines. After a short period all fibre cables went underground. But they were cut by many agencies. I had seen a bank becoming non operational due to the loss of total data centre connectivity. This barbaric system of regular road cutting should be banned by the supreme court, I feel. We need underground tunnels to handle water, power,gas, sewerage etc connections, not the primitive system of cutting the roads that we have now. 
 Fibre was planned well. Bangalore had been far ahead compared to other cities - whether copper, optical, digital, satellite, or VSAT or data and control centers. We had data and internet centers of BSNL by 2000.I had visited them. Similarly many data centres came up in Bangalore - BSNL, Wipro, Tata, Reliance etc- came up by 2000.
Greetings. Dks
